The Bullyproof curriculum has been developed to address the pervasive problem of bullying and teasing that occurs in the lives of many elementary school children.
The program enables students to distinguish between joking, teasing, and bullying, and to identify various options available to a child who is being bullied.
Bullyproof also helps children to recognize the responsibility of bystanders to the bullying.
This curriculum will teach students to handle conflict effectively, to recognize that people have different attitudes towards conflict and different approaches to handling conflict situations, to identify behaviors that aggravate conflict, and to develop ways of giving and receiving feedback.
Students will also analyze how issues of popularity, status and age may influence conflict that students experience.
The following is an overview of education services offered by the Susan B. Anthony Project.
For each topic listed, we will conduct a variety of activities with your students.
All lessons can be modified to best suit the needs of your students and their teachers.
We are happy to work with classroom teachers and school administrators to adjust our current programs or to develop new ones to provide the most positive experience possible.
Safe Touch Puppet Show: Pre-school through 3rd grade
The Safe Touch curriculum teaches young children to know and recognize their body parts, identify feelings, and clarify the difference between good touch, bad touch and uh-oh touches.
Children learn to identify the "uh-oh", or uncomfortable feeling, and what to do if someone touches them in a way that makes feel uncomfortable.
The difference between good secrets and bad secrets is also discussed, and children are taught that they need to tell an adult if keeping a secret makes them uncomfortable or is unsafe.
The curriculum also encourages children to trust their instincts, and establishes that children have the right to say no and the right to ask for help.
These skills help children develop a clear sense of their body rights and a voice to speak out against people who may be violating this right.
Bullyproof: 3rd through 6th grade
This program can be held for one class session, over several days in one week, once a month throughout the year, or several times during the school year.
Depending on time available and age of the participants, the curriculum can also be used as a context for discussing sexual harassment.
Conflict Resolution: Kindergarten through 12th grade
The conflict resolution curriculum can either be used independently or in conjunction with the Bullyproof program and over one of many sessions, depending on time available, age appropriateness and needs of the students.
Sexual Harassment: 5th through 8th grade
The sexual harassment curriculum emphasizes the difference between teasing, joking and sexual harassment.
Thoughout the curriculum, students define sexual harassment and learn about the laws related to sexual harassment.
Students will also examine and discuss various scenarios to gain perspective on what types of behavior could be considered harassment.
Gender stereotypes may also be discussed.
This program can be conducted independently or in conjunction with Bullyproof, conflict resolution, or gender, power and the media curriculums.
Gender, Power, Violence and the Media: 6th through 12th grade
Through this curriculum, students will define the terms gender stereotype, power, and violence and analyze the meanings of these terms.
Students will also learn about the cultural and societal messages that reinforce gender role stereotypes and explore how these messages can contribute to violence by analyzing the images and messages offered by the media.
This curriculum can also be used as a vehicle for talking about joking, teasing, bullying and sexual harassment.
For older students, this curriculum may focus on images of women in the media, body image, and the cultural construction of masculinity.
This program can occur over one, two, three, or four class sessions, but at least two sessions are recommended.
Healthy Relationships: 6th through 12th grade
This curriculum will allow students to recognize elements of healthy and unhealthy relationships, in both dating relationships and friendships.
Students will discuss qualities that they look for in a friend and those that they look for in a dating relationship and examine the difference between the two.
Students will recognize the various sources from which they learn about relationships and the influence these sources may have on their ideas regarding different relationships.
Elements that build a relationship or weaken a relationship will also be discussed.
Sexual Assault: 9th through 12th grade
Through this curriculum, students will learn about many aspects of sexual assault.
Students will define rape, sexual assault, and statutory rape.
They will also learn relevant facts and statistics regarding the prevalence of sexual assault.
Discussions and activities around the issue of date rape will enable students to analyze the issue of consent and to consider the difference between consent and compliance.