Most people hesitate to speak out because it can be hard.
It takes confidence to stand up to a bully - especially if he or she is one of the established group leaders.
But chances are the other students witnessing the bullying behavior feel as uncomfortable as you do.
They may just not be speaking up.
Perhaps they feel that they're not popular enough to take a stand or worry that they're vulnerable and the bully will turn on them.
Staying quiet (even though they don't like the bully's behavior) is a way to distance themselves from the person who is the target.
When a group of people keeps quiet like this, the bully's reach is extending beyond just one person.
He or she is managing to intimidate lots of people.
But when one person speaks out against a bully, the reverse happens.
It gives others license to add their support and take a stand, too.
Another way to combat bullying is to join your school's anti-violence program or, if your school doesn't have one, to start one of your own.
Bullying is a problem that affects millions of students, and it has everyone worried, not just the kids on its receiving end.
Yet because parents, teachers, and other adults don't always see it, they may not understand how extreme bullying can get.
Bullying is when a person is picked on over and over again by an individual or group with more power, either in terms of physical strength or social standing.
Two of the main reasons people are bullied are because of appearance and social status.
They may also taunt or tease their targets (verbal bullying).
Verbal bullying can also involve sending cruel instant or email messages or even posting insults about a person on a website - practices that are known as cyberbullying.
How Does Bullying Make People Feel?
One of the most painful aspects of bullying is that it is relentless.
Most people can take one episode of teasing or name calling or being shunned at the mall.
Guys and girls who are bullied may find their schoolwork and health suffering.
Every day thousands of teens wake up afraid to go to school.
Bullies pick on the people they think don't fit in, maybe because of how they look, how they act (for example, kids who are shy and withdrawn), their race or religion, or because the bullies think their target may be gay or lesbian.
Some bullies attack their targets physically, which can mean anything from shoving or tripping to punching or hitting, or even sexual assault.
Others use psychological control or verbal insults to put themselves in charge.
For example, people in popular groups or cliques often bully people they categorize as different by excluding them or gossiping about them (psychological bullying).
However, when it goes on and on, bullying can put a person in a state of constant fear.
Amber began having stomach pains and diarrhea and was diagnosed with a digestive condition called irritable bowel syndrome as a result of the stress that came from being bullied throughout ninth grade.
Mafooz spent his afternoons hungry and unable to concentrate in class because he was too afraid to go to the school cafeteria at lunchtime.
Studies show that people who are abused by their peers are at risk for mental health problems, such as low self-esteem, stress, depression, or anxiety.
They may also think about suicide more.
Bullies are at risk for problems, too.
Bullying is violence, and it often leads to more violent behavior as the bully grows up.
It's estimated that 1 out of 4 elementary-school bullies will have a criminal record by the time they are 30.
Some teen bullies end up being rejected by their peers and lose friendships as they grow older.
Bullies may also fail in school and not have the career or relationship success that other people enjoy.
Both guys and girls can be bullies.
Bullies may be outgoing and aggressive.
Or a bully can appear reserved on the surface, but may try to manipulate people in subtle, deceptive ways, like anonymously starting a damaging rumor just to see what happens.
Many bullies share some common characteristics.
They like to dominate others and are generally focused on themselves.
They often have poor social skills and poor social judgment.
Sometimes they have no feelings of empathy or caring toward other people.
Although most bullies think they're hot stuff and have the right to push people around, others are actually insecure.
They put other people down to make themselves feel more interesting or powerful.
And some bullies act the way they do because they've been hurt by bullies in the past - maybe even a bullying figure in their own family, like a parent or other adult.
Some bullies actually have personality disorders that don't allow them to understand normal social emotions like guilt, empathy, compassion, or remorse.
These people need help from a mental health professional like a psychiatrist or psychologist.
For younger kids, the best way to solve a bullying problem is to tell a trusted adult.
For teens, though, the tell-an-adult approach depends on the bullying situation.
One situation in which it is vital to report bullying is if it threatens to lead to physical danger and harm.
Numerous high-school students have died when stalking, threats, and attacks went unreported and the silence gave the bully license to become more and more violent.
Sometimes the victim of repeated bullying cannot control the need for revenge and the situation becomes dangerous for everyone.
Adults in positions of authority - parents, teachers, or coaches - can often find ways to resolve dangerous bullying problems without the bully ever learning how they found out about it.
If you're in a bullying situation that you think may escalate into physical violence, try to avoid being alone (and if you have a friend in this situation, spend as much time together as you can).
Try to remain part of a group by walking home at the same time as other people or by sticking close to friends or classmates during the times that the bullying takes place.
Some adults believe that bullying is a part of growing up (even that it is character building) and that hitting back is the only way to tackle the problem.
But that's not the case.
It may help to talk to a guidance counselor, teacher, or friend - anyone who can give you the support you need.
Talking can be a good outlet for the fears and frustrations that can build when you're being bullied.
Ask an adult you respect for some mentoring or coaching on how you could change.
If the environment at your school supports bullying, working to change it can help.
Because a lot of bullying takes part in the presence of peers (the bully wants to be recognized and feel powerful, after all), enlisting the help of friends or a group is a good way to change the culture and stand up to bullies.