Written by two internationally-known experts in international relocation and education, this thorough but user-friendly guide is packed with information not found in any other single source.
The Fourth Edition includes the latest statistics, web sites, and international comparisons, and a discussion of the new and sometimes controversial role of the federal government in overseeing education in the US.
FAQ: Are academically-oriented students educated differently than those who will not go on to university?
I n elementary and middle schools, all children are educated in the same schools, regardless of their abilities.
However, American teachers begin individualizing children's learning from kindergarten on, so that children who excel in reading or math, for example, may get more challenging assignments than other students.
Some schools begin to "track" (put children of different ability levels in different classes) in middle school.
In some communities or regions, there are vocational school alternatives to high schools, in which students learn job-related skills (like auto mechanics and food preparation) in addition to basic academics.
"AP" stands for Advanced Placement.
AP courses are taught at an advanced, more difficult level than the standard courses.
High schools may offer them in a number of subjects.
The most common courses are in English literature, U.S. History, and Calculus, but your school may also offer AP courses in such topics as biology, chemistry, English and other languages, European history, U.S. government, art history, statistics, and economics.
After completing an AP course, students may take a national AP exam in that subject.
Students who get a score of 3, 4, or 5 on the AP exam may be eligible to earn university credit for that course, and/or be allowed to start at a higher level in university.
FAQ: Some topics seem to be taught in too much detail, while others are only given light treatment; why?
American teachers sometimes choose one narrow topic (like "wolves" or "Beethoven") to study in detail.
Why wolves, not "mammals?"
By teaching a single topic in detail, teachers are trying to give students a sense of how to study a topic in depth, integrating such notions as habitat, migration, and the interconnected web of life.
On the other hand, in the American system, many important topics (like "decimals" or "medieval history") are taught at several different ages, in increasing detail and sophistication.
International families from some countries are surprised at the American emphasis on speaking in class, as opposed to listening to the teacher lecture.
In the American system, discussion of ideas and putting thoughts into words are highly valued.
Children are taught to speak aloud in class from the earliest days of kindergarten.
They have "Show and Tell" or "Sharing Time," when each child is expected to speak to the whole class about something that has happened in their lives (a trip to the zoo, a visit from a grandmother, etc.) This skill at speaking becomes especially important in later years, as children are expected to ask questions, think creatively about solutions (even if the solutions are wrong!)
, and even argue with the teacher.
Many international newcomers are surprised at how involved American parents are with their children's elementary schools.