Parents should call the high school; for general information, please call the Catholic School Information Line at (502) 634-1315.
Catholic high schools provide discipline, academic rigor, nurturing and a strong sense of community.
Christ-centered values are emphasized as schools focus on the development of the whole person.
Programs address the spiritual, academic, social, physical and emotional needs of young men and women.
Each high school has a unique spirit and living tradition that captures the hearts and minds of its students.
As a result, young people feel they really belong at the school of their choice and want to do well.
Approximately 16% percent of students in Catholic high schools are from other faith traditions.
All students take religious classes taught from the Catholic Christian tradition.
Classes and programs are built upon a shared sense of faith and respect for the unique contribution of each student.
What Is the Philosophy of Learning at Catholic High Schools?
Our goal is to form our students and, through them, our world in light of the Gospel message.
This is accomplished through a diverse community of schools, each with its own unique history, spirit and traditions.
In-depth study of the teachings and traditions of the Catholic Church and opportunities for students to develop their personal relationship with God within a caring faith community.
An exceptional academic experience that fosters the lifelong pursuit of truth through self-disciplined habits of mind, body and spirit.
A community of lifelong learners and believers who share responsibility for developing themselves to the fullest-intellectually, spiritually, emotionally, physically and aesthetically-with appreciation for diverse individual gifts and challenges and respect for the common good.
Catholic secondary schools offer educational programs that meet or exceed state requirements.
Founded on strong liberal arts traditions, supported by the technology of today and focused on the needs of tomorrow, the Catholic high school curriculum is designed to prepare students for a lifetime of learning and for the challenges of the 21st century.
Catholic high schools are accredited through the Southern Association of Schools.
Classes are geared to the learning ability of the student and address a wide variety of levels from basic college preparation to dual-credit and advanced placement (AP) and international baccalaureate (IB) levels.
Classes are offered in English and literature, mathematics, science, social studies, foreign languages, fine arts, health and physical education, and a wide variety of electives.
In addition, each high school provides a comprehensive religious program based on Catholic beliefs, values and traditions that actively promotes an awareness of the religious and ethical dimensions of life and teaches students to make principle-centered decisions.
Teachers in Catholic schools have appropriate college degrees for the grade levels and subjects they teach, and nearly 90 percent of teachers in Catholic high school have advanced degrees.
The ratio of computers to students varies from school to school, but on average there is 1 computer for every 3 students in Catholic high schools.
Technology in the high schools includes a variety of tools to assist students with their research, study and presentation of information.
Computers are used daily by students in classes from art to zoology.
The latest in graphing handhelds are used in mathematics and science classes to allow students to learn to use data in proving hypotheses and solving problems.
Computers with GIS allow students to use geographic data to analyze features of their city, their region and the world.
Interactive whiteboards, touch screens and slates allow students and teachers to physically manipulate, arrange and rearrange objects for presentation and discussion.
Catholic high schools students score above state and national averages on college standardized tests such as the SAT and ACT.
Up to 99% of Catholic high school students continue their education, and each year students earn millions of dollars in college scholarships.
All Catholic high schools have counselors to assist students with college and career preparation as well as personal and family issues.
Extracurricular opportunities will vary by school, but a wide variety of programs, clubs and other activities are found in all Catholic high schools.
Programs found in many high schools include student council and student government, school ambassadors, subject clubs such as French Club or Young Historians, choral, band, music groups, yearbook, school newspaper, YMCA groups such as KUNA and KLA, dance team, drama/theatre groups, quick recall, speech and debate, and academic honors groups such as the National Honor Society, the National Art Honor Society and the Spanish Honor Society.
There also are many clubs that focus on faith formation and service, and students have the opportunity to lead retreats, plan liturgies and participate in campus ministry.
Opportunities include cross country, volleyball, football, field hockey, cheerleading, basketball, baseball and softball, track, soccer and, in some cases, bowling, dance, wrestling, tennis, golf, swimming and lacrosse.
Please be aware that the Kentucky High School Athletic Association has policies concerning financial aid, merit scholarships and participation in varsity KHSAA-sponsored athletics.
The average tuition is $8,800-9,300 per year.
The Archdiocese and high schools offer financial assistance to families of high school students.
Most high schools also offer merit-based scholarships based upon students' performance on the placement test.
Please be aware that the Kentucky High School Athletic Association has policies concerning financial aid, merit scholarships and participation in varsity KHSAA-sponsored athletics.
Most schools charge a registration fee that is applied to tuition and that is paid at the time of registration.
Books are purchased separately.
In addition, athletic fees, lab fees, graduation fees and activity fees are charged separately and are usually paid at the beginning of the school year.
Parents should budget for the cost of school uniforms.
Many schools hold used uniform sales.