An alphabetical overview of all things related to the Religious School...
ARRIVAL The Goldsmith Religious School Building of Congregation Emanu-El is located at 10 East 66th Street.
Classes start at 9:30 AM on Sundays and 4 PM on Mondays and Wednesdays.
Please make every attempt to have your child arrive to school on time.
Latecomers should go directly to their first period location without causing any disruption to the class in session.
A-TEEM A-TEEM: The Assistant Temple Emanu-El Madrichim (Leaders) program provides an opportunity for leadership and involvement in administrative and academic components of the Religious School.
A-TEEM is a learning, working and teaching leadership program geared to involve 9th through 12th graders in all aspects of Religious School activities.
For more information or to participate, please contact Rachel Brumberg .
ATTENDANCE It is critical that each student attend class on a regular basis in order to learn the material covered throughout the year.
BAR/BAT MITZVAH Being called to the Torah as a bar or bat mitzvah provides an opportunity for communal recognition of a major milestone in the lives of our families.
There is no "doubling up"; only one child becomes a bar/bat mitzvah at a given service.
Parents may choose a date if their child is enrolled in the Religious School and is at least 10 years old or in fourth grade.
To schedule a date, or to ask specific questions about the process, please contact our Bar/Bat Mitzvah Coordinator .
To discuss issues related to the preparation and ritual of calling a bar/bat mitzvah to the Torah, including tutoring, please contact Rabbi Amy Ehrlich .
CELL PHONES Students are requested to keep cell phones OFF during Religious School hours.
Should you and your child need to make contact, you can reach each other through the Religious School office: (212) 744-1400, ext. 226.
CLERGY Through participation in schoolwide events, classroom teaching visits and private tutoring sessions, all members of the clergy play an active role in the Religious School and education of our students.
CONDUCT Our school is one in which all individuals, whether students or staff members, expect to be treated fairly and with respect.
All of our students, from youngest to oldest, are participants in the creation of an environment conducive for learning.
Students are expected to be courteous and respectful at all times, to cooperate with teachers, and to follow class rules.
In the older grades, students take greater responsibility for setting the classroom norms that allow them to most benefit from each lesson.
Each step in the journey towards confirmation combines text study, experiential education and personal reflection with community- and character-building activities.
The year concludes with the confirmation ceremony as part of the congregational celebration of Shavuot.
Unless otherwise noted, dismissal is from the lobby of the Goldsmith Religious School Building of Congregation Emanu-El, located at 10 East 66th Street.
If a student has not been picked up within 15 minutes of the end of school, the student will be brought up to the Religious School office until a parent or guardian arrives.
As soon as you know that your child will require a late pick-up, please contact the office so that we can make proper arrangements.
EARLY DISMISSAL If a student will need to leave school early, please contact the Religious School office in advance by phone or email or send your child to school with a note.
Please indicate the time that your child will be leaving and whether or not your child has your permission to travel from the classroom to the lobby unaccompanied.
Please note that, for the safety of our students, under no circumstances will we allow a student to leave early without written or verbal permission from the child's parent or guardian.
FLASH PASSES In order to ensure the safe dismissal of our students, we require families to provide on our student registration form the names of any adults who have permission to pick up their child or to indicate that their child may exit unaccompanied.
Students who are allowed to leave on their own will receive a "green" flash pass, which must be presented by the student upon dismissal.
If a student's dismissal information changes or if you need additional flash passes, then please contact the Religious School office.
MAILINGS We endeavor to keep you informed about all that is going on in the school and our programs for Emanu-El families, but at the same time we try to limit the amount of paper we use over the course of the year.
If you would prefer to receive the majority of our communications by email only, then please indicate this on your registration form, or contact the Religious School Office .
If you do not wish for Congregation Emanu-El to use photographs of your child on our website or in our publicity, then please indicate this on your registration form or contact the Religious School Office .
PLACEMENT Students will be placed in classes according to grade, class size and previous Hebrew background.
Final decisions regarding placement are made by the Director of Lifelong Learning.
RECYCLING Last school year, the teens participating in our weekly A-TEEM program chose one project to improve our Religious School community.
Now, thanks to these teen leaders, each classroom has a box for paper recycling.
Plastic and glass recycling will continue to be collected in the blue recycling bins located in the Religious School classroom hallways.
In addition, hanging in each classroom is a poster created by the A-TEEM about the importance of recycling within Judaism.
RELIGIOUS SCHOOL DINNERS Throughout the school year we hold Shabbat dinners open to Religious School families and their guests.
These dinners provide an opportunity for our community to meet and socialize.
There is a modest fee for these meals ($35 per family before the registration deadline, $50 after the deadline has past), and reservations are required.
SCHEDULE The Religious School schedule is as follows: • Sundays, 9:30 AM - 12 PM , Kindergarten - 6th Grade • Mondays, 4 PM - 6 PM , Kindergarten - 4th Grade • Wednesdays, 4 PM - 6 PM , 5th through 6th Grades
Please be advised that our security officers have the right, at any time, to inspect any individual as he or she enters or exits either the Marvin and Elisabeth Cassell Community House (One East 65th Street), the Temple Sanctuary (Fifth Avenue and 65th Street) or the Goldsmith Religious School Building (10 East 66th Street).
SENIOR YOUTH GROUP The Senior Youth Group provides a great way to make friends, experience Jewish cultural identity and live Jewish values through a wide variety of events ranging from a dinner at Sammy's Roumanian Restaurant to a "Midnight Run" around NYC tending to the homeless.
At each event, students enjoy a wonderful celebration of staying up late, making new friends, bonding with existing friends, and experiencing a Jewish holiday and their Temple in a new and truly unique and meaningful way.
SNACK/FOOD A light snack is provided for all students in the classroom during school and in the Early Room prior the start of school.
STUDENT COUNCIL The Religious School's Student Council has been meeting since 1965, under the leadership of Mr. Mark Willner.
Delegates meet approximately once a month on Sunday mornings, prior to regular class sessions.
The planning committee is open to all Emanu-El high school students (grades 9-12).
In 2009 we traveled to New Orleans to help rebuild; in 2010 we participated in a "Stay-Cation" and donated our efforts close to home in NYC; and in 2011 we visited the Religious Action Center in Washington, DC, where hundreds of Reform Jewish teens from around the country turn their Jewish values into political reality.
If you are interested in learning about the many opportunities to volunteer in the school and beyond (preparing mailings, assembling holiday gifts, running a booth at the Purim Carnival, helping with registration, chairing an event, working in the library, ushering during High Holy Days, Mitzvah Day projects and more!)