The AFA is willing to wait for conclusions of the 'review of the Chaplaincy Services in Queensland State Schools in conjunction with the review of the laws relating to religious instruction'.
However, because of the unworkable system that has allowed for the existence of the present dismal situation, the AFA has no confidence that radical and necessary change will be an outcome.
On receiving the results of the review, they will be examined with their efficacy judged, by the questions we will then pose, receiving full and honest answers.
This has not been a strong point of your department under the old system.
Minister, with all due respect, well might you state in you final comment; "Thank you again for your interest in the welfare of the students in Queensland state schools."
Your government has bowed willingly to religious pressure groups, whose only mission in life is to gain converts to a particular fantasy.
The Commonwealth shall not make any law for establishing any religion, or for imposing any religious observance, or for prohibiting the free exercise of any religion, and no religious test shall be required as a qualification for any office or public trust under the Commonwealth.
The question therefore has to be asked: Why have state governments taken it on themselves to override the intent behind the Constitution to promote Christian religion, and in the case of Chaplaincy, a divisive, backward thinking Fundamentalism, in State Schools.
Previous correspondence forwarded to you conveyed information on the current practices required by Education Queensland when chaplaincy services function in a Queensland state school and when religious instruction is delivered.
A review of the Chaplaincy Services in Queensland State Schools policy is being undertaken in conjunction with the review of the laws relating to religious instruction, which was referred to in previous correspondence.
Significant stakeholder groups from a range of religious groups and other organisations are contributing to this review.
The 'opt out' policy and the over represented specific 'faith' input demonstrate a will by government to place children in its care in a position of potential indoctrination by one section of the Christian religion.
It is obvious to students, that their schools promote one particular religion over others and no religion.
It appears the Chaplaincy program is a cheap alternative to hiring properly trained counsellors.
Utilising inappropriately trained personnel with high religious motivation, is saving money at the detrimental expense of young worldview forming minds.
Instances where a Chaplain or indeed the average untrained mature adult can be of assistance to students in a non-religious manner cannot be construed as a template recipe for all or even most situations.
Because Evangelical/Fundamentalist Christianity is capable of supplying enough proselytizers beyond numbers of other 'faiths' or no-'faith', is very poor reason indeed in allowing a mass presence in State schools.
It is not the intention to apply critical evaluation of the answers, by Mr Watt, to all nine questions the AFA asked, but to concentrate on the more obvious flaws.
The question re taxpayer input was prefixed with 'Generally' and included, 'also'.
Leaving that aside, doesn't the government wonder why "religious societies and denominations" monetarily support Chaplains?
(5) What is the controlling mechanism preventing chaplains proselytising their religious point of view in school hours?
Children of nominally Christian parents, a large proportion of society, more than elsewhere in their lives, experience exposure to specific religious induction.
(8) Is involvement with any religious aspects of the Chaplaincy a mandatory obligation for students?
The answer by Mr Watt did not mention the 'opt' out option.
(9) Do students have to opt in or opt out of the religious aspect of the Chaplaincy?
This answers the question but did not explain that the various sects of Christianity are all obliged to attend Chaplaincy classes.
Decisions in need of rational thought superseded instead, by favour to strong religious 'conscience', are well capable of usurping democratic process.
It is pointless, other than an exercise in robotics, in making reference to obsolete, impracticable and non-policeable policies, in lieu of answering pertinent questions relating to Chaplaincy programs.
The Atheist Foundation of Australia Inc is proud to add its name to the list of organisations and individuals who have actual interest in the mental welfare of students and the democracy they will one day manage.
The Constitution for the Commonwealth states: 116.
Copies to: Premier Peter Beattie Robert Messenger Shadow Minister Queensland Greens Scripture Union Queensland Various parties interested in the Chaplaincy program
Thank you for your follow up letter received on 9 August 2005 regarding your concerns with chaplaincy services in schools.
The Honourable the Premier has also referred your letter received on 17 August 2005.
I recognise that you have additional issues you wish the Department to consider.
Your thoughts on the information provided have been noted.
The Nuremburg defence also covered a further statement of mine.
The answer highlights that a Catholic, Anglican or Baptist student is obliged to attend a fundamentalist Chaplain's class as they come under the heading Christian.
He not only witnesses to people on parade, he is commonly invited to many functions (i.e. school camps, excursions, etc) and he walks around the school at lunchtime introducing himself and talking to people about god among many other things.
This year Victoria Point State High School held their Anzac Day ceremony on 22 April.
I am advised that a number of students did not attend the ceremony as their parents had requested their non-participation on religious or conscientious objection grounds.
These students were supervised in the library for the duration of the ceremony.
At Victoria Point State High School, assemblies are held once a fortnight with the agenda determined by student leaders in conjunction with the Principal.
The chaplain has addressed regular whole school assemblies on two occasions since July 2004.
(2) Is the situation at VPSHS reminiscent of all, some or a few state schools?
Each chaplaincy service at a Queensland State School is developed through a local chaplaincy committee in consultation with the total school community including administrators, teachers, parents and local religious groups.
Therefore, they will differ in the services and the activities the chaplain will provide.
Policy requires that, 'Chaplaincy services must reflect local circumstances, respond to local needs and be consistent with Education Queensland policy and procedures.'
(3) Is the Chaplaincy program funded by the taxpayer, directly or through payment to a controlling religious body?
The Chaplaincy Services in State Schools: Guidelines state, 'Generally, the financial resources needed to support such services also come from outside the school, with the participating religious societies and denominations making the major financial contributions.
However, other community groups, the school and the school's Parents and Citizens Association may also make significant contributions to the establishment and maintenance of the service.'
(4) Are Chaplains obliged to 'believe' in a fundamentalist view of Christianity?
Chaplains are the staff of an employing authority, which is accredited for the purpose by the Minister for Education.
The employing authority has responsibility for the employment conditions and payment of the chaplain's salary.
Each accredited authority has its own ethos and determines the criteria by which they employ their staff.
(5) What is the controlling mechanism preventing chaplains proselytising their religious point of view in school hours?
Religious instruction occurs in state schools in accordance with Section 26 of the Education (General Provisions) Act 1989.
Legislation requires that students only attend religious instruction classes if they are members of the religious group/s providing the instruction or have parental approval to attend.
This is clearly stated in point 2.2 of the chaplaincy services policy.
(6) What is the controlling mechanism preventing Chaplains recruiting children for extra curricula activities that may reflect or lead to a particular monotheistic point of view?
The local chaplaincy committee determines the major areas of responsibility and activity for the chaplain within the school.
These activities require the approval of the school principal and extra curricula activities would generally require parental permission for students to attend.
(7) Are other 'faiths' or no-faith programs allowable by Education rules?
If not, why not and who makes the rules considering we do live in a multicultural and multi-denominational country?
Faith programs can be delivered by religious groups from within the Christian and non-Christian traditions.
The requirement of legislation pertaining to religious instruction is that the religious group must have members in attendance at the school in order to deliver a 'faith' program.
It is also a requirement of legislation that the principal of the school arranges alternative activities for students who do not attend religious instruction.
(8) Is involvement with any religious aspects of the Chaplaincy a mandatory obligation for students?
Point 2.11 of policy states:
'Schools offering chaplaincy services should advise parents and students of: (a) the various chaplaincy services available in the school (b) arrangements for accessing chaplaincy services and (c) their right not to participate.'
Following your query, parents at Victoria Point State High school will be reminded that they are able to notify the Principal confidentially if they do not wish their child to be involved in activities led by the chaplain.
(9) Do students have to opt in or opt out of the religious aspect of the Chaplaincy?
If a chaplain is providing religious instruction he/she would do so in accordance with legislation for religious instruction in school hours.
This legislation requires that students who are members of the religious groups delivering the program would attend instruction unless they opt out at the request of a parent.
Students who are non-members can attend if parents request in writing that their child opt in.
A chaplain may be involved as a support person in a school activity or educational program, which may have some religious content.
Parents are advised when these programs or activities occur so they have the opportunity to request exemption for their child if they wish.
The Government recently canvassed community opinion regarding this issue.
Please refer to the enclosed consultation paper titled Education Laws for the Future which was circulated and discussed at a range of forums throughout the State.
One issue canvassed in the consultation paper was whether bodies such as the Humanist Society should be permitted to deliver classes to students in the time set aside for religious education classes.
The feedback from this paper is currently being collated and will assist future decision-making.
I invite you to contact Mr John Corbett, Principal, Victoria Point State High School on telephone (07) 3820 5888, should you wish to obtain further information in regard to this matter.
Thank you again for your interest in Chaplaincy Services and the welfare of students attending Queensland state schools.
Yours sincerely Murray Watt Senior Policy Adviser
Please quote: MCU
We have received correspondence from an ex-student of VPSHS expressing concerns about the obligatory nature of religious involvement.
The complaints concern prayers at a school Anzac Day parade and the recruitment drive at the fortnightly Assembly.
Students wishing exemption because of the religious content in the Anzac Day Parade were obliged to attend.
At the fortnightly Assembly, the Chaplain promoted extra curriculum activities.
This has the hallmark of directing children towards a particular religious worldview.
Their have been a growing number of complaints of this nature from both parents and students.
The AFA is disturbed that State education appears to be encouraging a breakdown in the ethos of keeping Church and State separate identities.
The promotion of a particularly narrow religious view afforded by fundamentalist Christian Chaplains in a multicultural and multi-denominational society is unacceptable.
Education is about giving factual information to children, in preparation for being productive and happy adults.
Chaplains promote a one-sided contorted picture of reality that works against this goal, especially in the matters of science and the formulation of healthy and non-divisive social attitudes.
It is our understanding that Chaplains have to 'believe' in a specifically religious fundamentalist interpretation of Christianity to obtain their position.
Children have very pliable minds and can be influenced and manipulated by people seen as the adult authority, we therefore request the following information:
(1) Is the situation at the Victoria Point State High School, as reported by a student, correct?
(2) Is the situation at the VPSHS reminiscent of all, some or a few State Schools?
(3) Is the Chaplaincy program funded by the taxpayer, directly or through payment to a controlling religious body?
(4) Are Chaplains obliged to 'believe' in a fundamentalist view of Christianity?
(5) What is the controlling mechanism preventing Chaplains proselytising their religious point of view in school hours?
(6) What is the controlling mechanism preventing Chaplains recruiting children for extra curriculum activities that may reflect or lead to a particular monotheistic point of view?
(7) Are other 'faiths' or no-faith programs allowable by Education rules?
If not, why not and who makes the rules considering we do live in a multicultural and multi-denominational country?
(8) Is involvement with any religious aspects of the Chaplaincy a mandatory obligation for students?
(9) Do students have to opt in or opt out of the religious aspect of the Chaplaincy?
The questions and the concerns expressed in this letter are of vital importance and interest to many people.
As children are at the formulation stage of democratic ideas, the hope is that public knowledge on the mechanism and reasoning for and about having Chaplains in schools is freely available, forthright and comprehensive.
Yours sincerely, David Nicholls President Atheist Foundation of Australia Inc. cc Premier Peter Beattie Robert Messenger Shadow Minister Queensland Greens