What "faith instructors" want is the power conveyed by the state to create a situation where the children come to them as part of an activity they are compelled to do.
The last thing "faith instructors" want - is to have to ask people to sign up and attend "on their own".
We are sick and tired of being told by "faith instructors" and their enablers, that there are no issues, or "lets not throw the baby out with the bath water".
The baby in the bath is the loud complaining of "faith instructors" who are scared to death that without the schools giving them a half hour that their enrollments will shrink.
Lastly, the evidence, some of which is linked on our site, shows that good multi faith education is helpful to understanding and tolerance in a pluralist society, and this is overwhelmingly what "parents" and "teachers" want - the only one who wants differently it seems are "faith instructors" and other avowed sectarian interests.
Families are perfectly capable of choosing and engaging in religion - the Minister of Education should not negotiate with "faith instructors" in order to introduce sectarian programs in the schools - this is exactly what is happening here, and raising the concerns of organizations in the business of doing "faith instruction" above the interests of teachers and families is a violation of the basic rights of citizens in a society based on the idea of religious toleration and freedom.
FIRIS gets mail from a concerned parent who is not in the "inner-urban" zone where ACCESS Ministries is based ... this parent is wise enough to know when the fix is in.
FIRIS would like to offer the idea that "secular" education is the foundation - and lifeblood of this nation.
ACCESS is clearly hostile to the core values of Australian society - shame on you ACCESS for thinking you could run over parents like this!!
Stand tall.
Begin correspondance:
During the past week I've been following media reports and FIRIS updates with great interest.
The parents participating in the VCAT hearing should be commended for their commitment and courage.
My children attend a state school in Melbourne's leafy outer east... Evonne Paddison may be shocked to know there is a "small, secularist group" alive and kicking here too, even though we are not "inner-urban".
Both of my children have opted out of CRE classes run at the school.
I continue to feel incredulous that children at a secular school should have to opt OUT of religious education, and hope that eventually this system will change.
Our school's provider is Access Ministries, and during the past week I have been appalled by their attempts to gain further influence in our secular school, this time via the government's National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program (NSCSWP).
On Wednesday 29th Feb, parents were invited to attend a forum at which Ainsley Carr, a representative from ACCESS Ministries, was present to answer our questions about the National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program.
She was, of course, also there to promote ACCESS Ministries as 'the best man for the job'.
The school Principal was also present at the forum.
Myself and other parents attending were surprised to learn that the closing date for NSCSWP grant applications was Friday 2nd March at 8pm, giving our school little more than 48 hours to finalise an application and decide on an appropriate provider/recipient who could best meet the needs of our school community.
Given that ACCESS Ministries was the only provider attending the forum, some parents expressed concerns about the possibility that, were we to nominate ACCESS Ministries as the funding recipient, proselytising would occur in our school.
Ms Carr assured us that would not happen, and said proselytising and evangelism are prohibited under the program guidelines.
She said that while ACCESS Ministries Chaplains were drawn to chaplaincy roles because of their Christian faith and values, their intention was not to push their personal religious beliefs onto other people, but to offer a variety of support services that would improve student wellbeing and meet the diverse range of needs within the school community.
When asked about other possible providers for the role, Ms Carr informed us that all the providers on the list were Christian organisations.
She finished her presentation by thanking us for asking such "wonderful questions", stated that it was wonderful for her to have the opportunity to answer "such interesting questions" and even claimed that, in her previous experiences of liaising with other schools, she had never been presented with these sorts of questions before.
One parent later commented to me that she found it hard not to vomit in response to Ms Carr's saccharine manner and patronizing comments.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.
Our concerns were heightened when we went home and did our own research... a quick check of the current Provider list on the DEEWR website reveals that there are at least 4 providers who are secular.
But wait, there's more... Ms Carr had handed us brochures at the start of her presentation, which we didn't have a chance to read until we went home.
The brochures read, "Victoria's young people need to know God cares for them no matter who they are or what they have done... Young Victorians need Christian school chaplains from ACCESS Ministries.
Every day of the school year, ACCESS Ministries chaplains are sharing God's love with young Victorians."
Towards the end of the publication there is a photo of the (now infamous) Evonne Paddison, together with a list of her credentials, and a description of her demeanor - "There's a passion for life at work here... It's in the way she's as comfortable lobbying for chaplaincy at Parliament as she is using 'Jerry the Puppet' to enthrall a tiny Prep student."
The brochure also includes ACCESS Ministries 'vision' for the future.
It states, "Our vision is to transform a nation... it means steering ACCESS Ministries through a phase of intense growth... and ultimately it means reaching every school student in Victoria.
We know just the right person for the job."
All I can say to that is, Holy S*#%.
I wish ACCESS Ministries were on trial, and I hope one day they (and Jerry the Puppet) will be barred from spreadin' the love at state schools.
As for our particular school, fortunately, our Principal appears to be listening to our concerns and has acknowledged that further parental consultation is warranted.
But I ask you, is half an hour a week in a government-approved class in our information rich world going to create Christian converts?
The question here isn't whether ACCESS is incompetent at bringing children to Christ in Australia's largest "mission field" (aka, the schools) it is whether they are breaking the law by violating important rights that families and children have in our country.
Rather than remove the "secular" provision that forms the "principles" of the original law and therefore is the "foundation" of the education system itself, the law was amended to allow an "exception".
Richards did make the argument that SRI has been and is promoted as "something that is good for you even if you are not religious", because it contains many things and ideas that have "secular value", to do this she simply read from the information given to parents about "The agreed Christian syllabus called "Religion in Life".
These are of course all statements intended to disguise the fact that this program is a Christian Ministry run by a group who has told us that they want to "make disciples of children".
MULTI-faith primary schools are forced to hold Christian religious classes, even if the school doesn't want them, the Herald Sun can reveal.
Parents might choose not to have their children attend, but the school council and school principal must offer classes if approached by an approved provider, an Education Department spokeswoman said.
At Ormond Primary a local Anglican priest, the Reverend Kevin Pedersen, has gained access to the school to teach weekly 30-minute classes to the younger students, despite not being invited initially by the principal or the school council.
A letter to parents from Ormond principal Glenn Butler, seen by the Herald Sun , said the decision to introduce the classes was not initiated by the school, nor was the endorsement of school council sought.
It says the school council does not have the authority to decide whether the program takes place.
"We do not want our daughter to be separated from her classmates," she said.
Mr Pedersen, from the Ormond Anglican Church, said he approached the school 18 months ago and had a good relationship with the school.
There is a growing backlash against religious instruction in schools, with a case before VCAT challenging the law on the ground of discrimination.
Ormond principal Mr Butler said the program met the legislative requirements.
- Dr Alison Mawhinney Lecturer in Law / Darlithydd yn y Gyfraith School of Law / Ysgol y Gyfraith Bangor University / Prifysgol Bangor BANGOR, Gwynedd, LL57 2DG E-mail / E-bost:  a.mawhinney@bangor.ac.uk Tel / Ffon: 01248 388204
Gall y neges e-bost hon, ac unrhyw atodiadau a anfonwyd gyda hi, gynnwys deunydd cyfrinachol ac wedi eu bwriadu i'w defnyddio'n unig gan y sawl y cawsant eu cyfeirio ato (atynt).
Os ydych wedi derbyn y neges e-bost hon trwy gamgymeriad, rhowch wybod i'r anfonwr ar unwaith a dilëwch y neges.
Nid yw Prifysgol Bangor yn gwarantu bod y neges e-bost hon neu unrhyw atodiadau yn rhydd rhag firysau neu 100% yn ddiogel.
As indicated on this site last year, I have taken a positive interest in the FIRIS campaign.
Like a range of other active Christians, I am dismayed that ACCESS no longer seems to represent the breadth of theological viewpoint across the churches.