In order to participate in a Bar\Bat Mitzvah, a student is required to attend The Jewish Center's Religious School from grades Gimmel through Zayin (3 - 7).
During these years, school attendance requirements for promotion must be met.
Private tutoring or attendance at another area Religious School in lieu of participation in The Jewish Center Religious School do not meet The Jewish Center's requirement.
Any request for deviation from this policy must be presented in writing to the Religious School Committee, whose decision shall be final.
This does not apply to those who are new to the community and who have attended Religious School elsewhere.
Eligibility for Bar/Bat Mitzvah
It is important for everyone to understand that only children who are considered to be Jewish by the Conservative movement's standards may become a Bar or Bat Mitzvah at The Jewish Center.
The Conservative movement defines a Jew as a person born to a Jewish mother or converted to Judaism.
If anyone has any questions or concerns about converting to Judaism please contact Rabbi Feldman or Rabbi Tucker.
Specific Jewish Center Requirements
Religious School enrollment and attendance from Gimmel through Zayin.
Attendance at a minimum of 10 Shabbat morning services in the Vav year and 18 Shabbat morning classes and services in the Zayin year.
Individual tutoring for Bar/Bat Mitzvah scheduled by the Cantor or Bar/Bat Mitzvah tutors.
Placement in the Tropes class will be dependent on the Bar/Bat Mitzvah date and placement will be either in the spring of the Vav year or in the Zayin year.
Completion of a Hesed Project and D'var Torah.
For a more complete explanation of the Bar/Bat Mitzvah process, please consult the Bar/Bat Mitzvah Handbook.
Copies are available on-line, in the School Office, or from Gila Levin, the Bar/Bat Mitzvah Coordinator, who can be reached at 609-921-0100, extension 208.
Students are expected to behave in a manner consistent with a good learning environment.
Each class and teacher will create a contract to establish a set of class rules for behavior which will be posted in the classroom.
If a student's behavior interferes with learning in the classroom, the following steps may be taken:
The teacher will contact the parent by phone, email or by mail
The Principal will contact the parent by phone, email, or by mail.
A conference with the Principal and/or representative of the School Committee will be held
The student may be suspended from one or more classes (can be in-school or at home)
Final decisions concerning such disciplinary actions are at the discretion of the Principal and School Committee.
IF A CHILD IS SENT TO THE OFFICE THREE TIMES, A PARENT WILL HAVE TO COME AND SIT IN THAT CLASS FOR THE NEXT THREE SESSIONS.
IF A PARENT DOES NOT COME, THE CHILD WILL NOT BE ALLOWED TO RETURN TO CLASS.
IF A STUDENT REQUIRES TUTORING TO MAKE UP WORK DUE TO A DISCIPLINARY SUSPENSION, SUCH TUTORING WILL BE DETERMINED BY THE PRINCIPAL AND WILL BE AT THE PARENT'S EXPENSE.
Students are not allowed to leave The Jewish Center grounds during school hours.
Violation of this rule will result in an automatic suspension.
A student will also automatically incur a suspension if he/she causes physical harm to someone at school or destroys school property, including nursery school toys and work.
Bullying or harassing other students will not be tolerated.
In the event physical damage is done to any school or synagogue property, the parent of the responsible student will be billed for repair of the damage.
This includes equipment inside as well as outside, including the playgrounds and landscaping.
When a student is not on grade level, parents will be advised.
The student can be tutored during class time by a volunteer in 15-20 minute sessions depending upon availability and timing.
The Religious School Staff will try, to the best of their ability, to keep the aforementioned child from ingesting or contacting foods or other substances known to contain any components of the allergen.
In the event of an adverse reaction, someone on staff will try to administer the Epipen and summon professional help.
The officers and staff of The Jewish Center disclaim any liability and responsibility for any damages, monetary or otherwise, that could be incurred by the aforementioned child or family if there is an adverse outcome or reaction, as we are not medically equipped to deal with a severe allergy.
Such students will be appropriately placed.
If a student's skills are not adequate, private tutoring may be required at the parent's expense.
Students must be enrolled in The Jewish Center Religious School to have a Bar or Bat Mitzvah at The Jewish Center.
The student may be expelled from the Religious School.
STUDENTS WHO ARE ABSENT 20% OF THE CLASS TIME WILL NOT BE ELIGIBLE FOR IN-SCHOOL TUTORING.
Students coming prior to 3:50 p.m. should report to the Youth Lounge in the Sanctuary building.
NO CHILD MAY WAIT IN THE PARKING LOT OR COURTYARD FOR AN EARLY PICK-UP.
However, we do realize that emergency situations sometimes occur which is why a fee will only be charged after the first incidence.