If a child misses a birthday party, please do not send him/her to school with a present for the birthday child.
It upsets the children who were not invited to the party and also puts the staff at risk in case the present is inadvertently misplaced or damaged.
For in-class birthday celebrations, rather than sending in party favors for each child, parents are encouraged to donate a favorite book or toy to their child's class.
Bookplates on which your child's name can be inscribed are available in the Nursery School office and in each classroom.
Birthday parties held on Shabbat or a Jewish holiday are discouraged .
Many families send their child to The Jewish Center Nursery School precisely because it is "Jewish," that is, Jewish life and particularly Shabbat are revered.
Birthday parties on the Sabbath conflict with the message they are given in school.
A heightened sensitivity to the Jewish traditions of our students should be your guideline when planning any celebration outside of school.
Creating an environment beyond the classroom that signals the inclusive community we seek to be will not isolate any Nursery families because of religious beliefs and practices.
Everyone can play a part in bringing the school community closer to that ideal.
As parents, you are active participants in creating the environment for The Jewish Center community that does not define itself exclusively within the hours of the school day and the boundaries of the school building.
You are also strongly encouraged to invite everyone in your child's class to out-of- school celebrations such as birthday parties.
Preschool children talk about their birthday parties and it is hurtful to those children who are excluded.
The holidays of Halloween and Valentine's Day are not observed at The Jewish Center.
Therefore, your cooperation is requested in not sending in cards or candy items on those days.
All Jewish holidays are celebrated.
Appropriate songs, games, stories, art projects and instruction in customs and special foods for the holiday will be integrated into the curriculum surrounding each observance.
Non-religious national holidays, such as Thanksgiving, are also observed.
For your convenience and to encourage you to celebrate Shabbat at home , there is a hallah delivery service at the Nursery every Friday.
If a special school event takes place on a day that your child does not usually attend school, you and your child may come to school for the duration of the event provided that he/she is accompanied by a parent or caregiver at all times.