Even though it costs $5,000 per person per student, to educate a kid in a public school, they figure that if we transfer even a fraction of that money, half of that money, to a parochial school, somehow we are advancing religion.
If it costs $5,000 to do a secular education, then $2,500 doesn't even get you the full cost of a secular education, much less advancing religion.
CHARLES R. LAWRENCE III: I'm actually glad that Bob began with some facts that the courts do not talk about.
I plan to do much the same, though I read them somewhat differently.
One is as a constitutional scholar, asking what outcome the precedent dictates.
One is as a school board member in an urban district, not all that different from what Bob described in Cleveland; an urban district that has been under a desegregation order even longer than Cleveland; an urban school district which is still largely segregated; an urban school district in which most white children attend private schools.
And so, I also want to think about this in the context of my concern about whether the outcome of this case will best serve "the equality of justice," and particularly for those who continue to be systematically denied the human right to learn in this city and in Cleveland, largely who are black and, to some extent, who are Latino children.
I'm also concerned about the outcome of this case as a parent; as a parent who is concerned about my children continuing to be educated in schools in which they are exposed to a diversity of students who are many religions, who are many classes and races, and where tolerance among those groups is taught, where all of us are inculcated to the secular values of citizenship and democracy, and their primary concern of the school is not to indoctrinate children with regard to a particular religion.
And I'm also concerned about the outcome of this case as a person with a deeply held faith; as a religious person who is concerned that the outcome of this case not diminish either mine or other's freedoms to hold and practice our beliefs without coercion or stigma because of the state's support of one religion or another, even if it be my own.
Having said that, there are a couple of things I want to say first about what I think are the key elements of this case, and then also about how the history of what's going on in this case comes in with the constitutional analysis.
It has to do with guarding against state coercion, indoctrination, endorsement, stigma, because one religion is favored over another.
It also has to do with the state not supporting one religion in favor of another, the neutrality notion.
And it also has to do with avoiding balkanization - the sense that in a democracy that we can't agree to disagree because we are so grounded in our individual faiths and educated in a way that we don't have an understanding and a tolerance for our ability to relate to other people.
It's important to think about the fact that ever since Jefferson first proposed the public schools, they have played a central role in this democratizing factor.
In cases like Bethel, the Supreme Court has talked about the public school's central role as value inculcator.
So it's often argued in the doctrinal context of these cases that the fact that we give parents a choice removes the nexus between the government's support of a religious school and the government so that this is no longer direct government-supported schooling because it goes through the parent.
And the analogy is often drawn between this case and the case where a mother might take her government salary and choose to spend it in a secular school, or take a tax rebate and choose to go down to a local Catholic school and spend it on tuition, that it's just the same thing.
I would argue that you look carefully at what's going on here, the more apt analogy is the analogy of the state of Cleveland turning over a large segment of its public schools in Cleveland to the Diocese of Cleveland and saying, we've decided you can do a better job of educating the poor children in this district.
You have to remember that Bob says that this is a case about not trusting Catholic or any other kind of religious teachers to know that their job is to teach math or teach physics rather than religion.
All of them, as religious schools, say that a central part of their mission is to try to inculcate in these children the centrality of faith.
So this is not a case like some of the earlier cases where the court is saying, these are public school teachers, for instance, who are coming into school just to teach math and we have to try to figure out whether it's possible for a public school teacher just to teach math in a religious school.
It's a case about money being given to a religious school to do what they are to do.
And many if not most of these schools make no claim that their teachers will try to distinguish between when they are engaging in secular teaching and when they're being a religious teacher.
And certainly, as a religious adherent myself, I would not want a school, as a religious school, to have to do that if they chose not to do it.
I think that part of the separation of church and state that protects religion, is that religion, when it does not receive money from the government, is free to teach what it believes and to inculcate in the ways that it wants to inculcate, and that's part of what the separation of church and state is about.
Now, I just want to briefly say one other thing that comes back to the facts in the history.
I think it's important to remember that this case starts out, as Melissa noted, as a remedy to a judicial decree in a desegregation case.
It's a remedy where the court hands over to the chief state officer the power to run the Cleveland School District, and then the state legislature adopts this statute that gives the remedy to parents of taking this voucher, this $2,200, and spending it where they choose.
I think that when you think about that as a judicial remedy to a desegregation case, it's important to think about other remedies that were not given to these parents, and that that's key because key in this case for Establishment Clause purposes is whether this is really about free choice, whether these parents choose to attend these religious schools.
Now, I would say in the remedy of the kind of historical inequalities that Bob was talking about - and that he himself fought for - this is hardly a choice.
It is not what would've otherwise happened if there were other remedies available.
Is it really true that, all other things being equal, that 96 percent of these parents would be sending their kids to religious schools?
I think that the very argument that I'm making from equality is also the argument that makes this a case of establishment; a case in which, by the failure to give parents other choices, real choices to get sound, top education for their children, in large part imposed by Supreme Court doctrine.
Now, did we think it would be constitutional if the statute read that Ohio adopted something like this: There's a preamble that says the Cleveland schools are inadequate, mismanaged, and the students are doing poorly, so we're going to allow parents to have choice, we're going to give scholarships in the form of vouchers, up to $2,500, to any school that is a private school, except we are going to exclude from this group religious schools.
The Establishment Clause also says you're not supposed to establish or show hostility towards religion.
How much more hostility can you show than by saying, the schools that are willing to help solve this problem - I don't think we've penalized the Catholic schools because they're willing to take these students in at $2,500.
And I disagree, I don't think the fact that the Catholic school's tuition is less meant that kids were getting an inferior education to Sidwell Friends, necessarily.
I did not attend a Catholic school, but I had friends that did in communities that were marginal as far as economic need and where schools were in trouble.
And the fact is you cannot penalize the religious school because they're willing to participate in a program that is broad-based.
The parties concede, and the court acknowledges, that this is not a situation where this program was established for the purpose of advancing religion.
This was a program established because the schools in Cleveland stunk, and they were in trouble.
A voucher program to give some of these parents some choice in where these kids go to school, vesting that control back into parents, was a legitimate option.
To exclude the religiously affiliated school, as I said, in my view shows hostility towards religion, which is specifically prohibited by the Establishment Clause.
I draw an analogy to the cases - and it's in a little bit of a different context, but I think the principle applies -involving access to school facilities or to government buildings by religious groups.
The argument is made that if we allow this group to be here, we're taking government money and allowing a religious group to be here, we're going to, therefore, violate the Establishment Clause and church-state separation, and you can't let the religious schools in.
And consistently, the Supreme Court, in Lamb's Chapel, in Mergens, most recently in Good News, the Supreme Court said, look, if you've got a neutrally available program allowing groups to use your facilities, even though there may be government dollars involved, the fact is you can't exclude then the religious group from participating simply because it's a religious group.
What is the basis upon which the objection is made here to the voucher program put in place in Cleveland?
The objection is religious schools are going to participate.
Now, I don't think that the fact that 82 percent of the schools involved in this particular case were religious schools shows an Establishment Clause problem.
I think it shows that the secular counterparts of these schools are still engaging in discriminatory practices because they make it - I think Sidwell Friends should simply say, you know what, there's a problem in Washington D.C. in the public schools, and we're going to help out.
So if you adopt, Professor, a voucher program, Sidwell Friends should make some scholarships available so that the $2,500 that the city gives, coupled with what the District gives, and coupled with the scholarships that the well-off people at Sidwell Friends give, these kids can go to school.
Let's not allow the penalty of complying with this program or participating in this program fall on the religiously affiliated schools because they're willing to bear the brunt of this problem in Cleveland, and in other places.
Judge Battisti, over the years when he was sitting on the Northern District of Ohio's bench, kind of riding herd on the Cleveland School Board, consistently enraged a lot of people in town because he basically said, you people are running a plantation, and this is a melting pot city that never melted.
I think that in the long run you would have the kind of homogeneity that you're talking about overall.
Second, on the other options point, there is no option for public school choice outside Cleveland.
Not a single public school has ever done it and the economic incentives are set up to make it virtually impossible.
And as to charters and magnet schools, that's sort of like saying, well, you have the option to stay at your regular school.
The Supreme Court's never looked at it that way.
You have to look at the program, and the program is the voucher program in which 96 percent of the slots are religious.
Third, I reject the notion the public schools are promoting a religion, or an anti-religion of secular humanism.
As I said before, I think public schools can and should be neutral if we work hard enough at making it that way.
Fourth, I agree there is no federal constitutional problem with a voucher program for non-religious schools.
There may be state constitutional problems in some states, but in the federal Constitution the only barrier is clearly the Establishment Clause.
You could do it but the voters have rejected it in just about every state.
And the fifth one was about - what was the monopoly question again?
Q: Your argument is that we can't have vouchers because there's only Catholic schools out there.
My argument is that there would be other kinds of schools if there wasn't a monopoly.
MR. MINCBERG: That raises a very interesting question.
You could, in theory I suppose, eliminate public schools altogether, take the money that is allegedly there and say to parents, here it is, you guys spend this money anywhere you want to.
Under those circumstances, what you talk about might happen.
But under the current system as it exists, and given the limitations that are inevitably put on voucher programs, it is inevitable that the vast majority of the schools will be religious.
That's happened in Cleveland, that's happened in Milwaukee where there have been some non-religious schools, but really very, very few because it is those schools that choose to do what they do, and they have every right to do it, but not with my taxpayer dollars.
MS. ROGERS: Jay Sekulow.
MR. SEKULOW: I disagree with Elliot on four out of five points, and where we agree is there's no underlying federal constitutional objection to voucher programs for non-religious schools.
MS. ROGERS: Dr. Lawrence.
The only other point that I would make in response to the question about the market is that the restrictions that I'm concerned about having to do with the market and education don't just have to do with the small amount of money that these children have to spend, although that's largely the point.
I'm not getting on the Catholic Church for the fact that these 96 percent of these schools are Catholic.
The Catholic school's not just interested in teaching religion, but they have had a mission to serve more children.
Catholic schools were also the first schools to desegregate.
But the fact is that in this instance, for me it's part of a much larger question, and it's a question of whether we, in the guise of offering a remedy to extreme inequality, or offering something that might be a little bit better for parents but is far short of what the same people were promoting that have denied these parents; far short of what the same people who argued on the other side on Rodriguez, on the other side on Milliken, you know, all of sudden they want to give me a voucher to spend in the same neighborhood in Cleveland.
And I don't believe I recall the other question for me...
Q: The differing viewpoints of coercion and how you can call it coercive to give the student the voucher program, yet not coercive, or even not less coercive, to require the student to stay within the public school system and not give them any options in which they're being taught with what I'm describing as a secular, humanistic viewpoint.
MR. LAWRENCE: Well I think that I would have two responses to that.
One is that I think to the extent that I would agree with you that these students were being forced to take a viewpoint that was against their religion, that that is coercive.
But I think that my concern here is with the Establishment Clause - that if this is being defended as not a primary effect with advancing religion because in fact there's free choice.
Since at least the 1930's, we've understood about legal formalism.
MR. LAWRENCE: I told you I'd support the larger voucher with the regulations on the schools that require equality.
Is it your position that public schools are not teaching things contrary to the religious beliefs of some of the students of parents in those schools?
The answer is, where it's been permitted, like in Mitchell v. Helms involving computers, like in the Agostini case involving people going into religious schools to teach Title I, and it's been set up in a way in which the funding is not supposed to, and we have to assume because the Supreme Court says so, doesn't advance the religious mission of the school.
But different than vouchers, is that this is totally unrestricted money.
This is money to the voucher schools, which essentially the parents should sign over and there it goes.
It goes into their coffers, to use a phrase that Justice O'Connor often uses, and they can use it any way they want to, including to promote and inculcate religion.
And indeed, the record of the case shows that most of them say that the promotion and inculcation of religion is integrally entwined with all the education they do.
Again, they have every right to do that, but they don't have a right to do that, I think, says the Establishment Clause, with taxpayer dollars.
MR. SEKULOW: So don't send your kid to school there.
If you say, well, why don't you send your kids to Sidwell, or whatever?
MR. MINCBERG: Let me just say that Jay's idea of saying, no, well, go to one of the 4 percent that isn't, that's sort of like me giving you a check and saying, you can spend this money anywhere you want to, but within these 100 stores, 96 percent of which sell only religious merchandise.
My question is this: We've heard about parental choice, and Mr. Mincberg and Professor Lawrence have talked about, to an extent, about school selectivity, but I would like to hear something from some panelists about the fact that, say, Jewish schools, Muslim schools, Catholic schools, Lutheran schools, fundamentalist Protestant schools, Seventh-Day Adventist schools, and others, which tend to be pervasively sectarian, tend to distract choices from people of widely varying religious persuasions, leading to a religious homogeneity in the voucher schools.
When you look at this program, you need to consider the other options that are also available here such as charter schools, which are publicly funded, such as the open enrollment programs, as well as the scholarship programs, as well as magnet schools within the district.
Q: In the discussion of - (off mike) - voucher programs, which we didn't have, didn't allow money to go into a pervasively sectarian school or institution.
Q: Yeah, I want to challenge Professor Lawrence's assumption that the market for schools is currently competitive, and that the explanation for the fact that 90-something percent go to Catholic schools is because currently only Catholic schools can effectively compete -- that they are subsidized by the Catholic Church -- with the monopoly that aids public schools.
However, I would argue that that doesn't make it any better because the effort is to promote their religion to those that aren't believers yet.
Jay Alan Sekulow , Counsel of Record for the American Center for Law and Justice, amicus curiae supporting the constitutionality of the Cleveland school voucher plan; oral advocate before the U.S. Supreme Court in nine cases
Moderator: Melissa Rogers , Executive Director of the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life
NOTE: The recording of this session was of poor quality, particularly during the question and answer portion of the discussion.
MELISSA ROGERS: My name is Melissa Rogers and I am executive director of the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life.
We're very pleased to able to hold this forum with the Georgetown chapters of the American Constitution Society and the Federalist Society, and we are so glad that you could join us today.
As an initial matter, I want to thank Georgetown's chapters of the student organizations, who have done such fine work for the events that they have put together, and the faculty sponsors.
Let me call first on David Favre, the president of the Georgetown American Constitution Society, and Chris Byrnes, president of the Georgetown Federalist Society to say a couple words about their organizations before we get underway.
If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to check out our web site at americanconstitutionsociety.org.
While the Sixth Circuit decision found those programs to be irrelevant to it's decision, I'm sure we'll get some disagreement on the panel about the relevancy of those other programs to the matter at hand.
The parties agree that during the 1999-2000 school year, 96% of the students participating in this program went to religious schools, and 82% of the participating schools were themselves religious.
The record also indicates that at one time during the program's course, as many as 22% went to non-religious schools.
The money that comes to the schools via the scholarship program may be used for any purpose.
In other words, it's not restricted from religious use.
The proceedings are pretty complicated, but let me skate over them very quickly just to help us get the conversation started.
Subsequently, the legislature went back and fixed the technical, one-subject rule problem with the Ohio scholarship program while keeping the other elements of the program the same, and it went back into existence.
Secondly, the crux of the matter, and what I think we'll spend a lot of time talking about today, is the question of whether the voucher plan has the forbidden primary effect of advancing religion, which would be prohibited by our Constitution.
Of course, this case is a very important case in and of itself because the school voucher matter has been a hotly contested one for many, many years, and so the decision just on the school voucher issue will be tremendously important.
You all remember, I suppose, the scene in the movie where Toto pulls back the curtain and the wizard says, don't pay any attention to that little guy behind the curtain.
It is ironic in many respects that this case comes up in the way it does, because if there is anything that is clear in the history of church-state relations it's that discrimination in the public school systems on the basis of religion has certainly been rampant since at least in the mid-1840's.
All you have to do is go back and look at the cases where the kids were disciplined for refusing to read the Bible or refusing to do various and sundry other things that were required up until the Supreme Court eliminated mandatory school prayer and Bible reading in the 1960's .
I think I indicated in my remarks that there are many schools that I couldn't afford to send my children to that, in terms of academic reputation, are better than schools that my children attend.
And I think that's the position that we're going to be left in if we look at what this Cleveland case is about, which is whether we're going to go the market route in public school.
The school that I went to I had to take an academic test to get into, not that it would have done very much good for most poor kids in public schools in Chicago where I grew up.
We were doing a case a few years ago in Mississippi of a family that went to a public school that didn't do it that way, that was having prayer broadcast over the intercom.
I think that the neutrality that's required in the school is that the public school and government money not endorse, not take a position.
The neutrality doesn't require that the school shut up individuals from expressing their varying and disparate beliefs in the context of the school.
So what I think is most important about not balkanizing ourselves into everyone going to their own religious school is that what I want for my children, and I think what we need for democracy, for true democracy, is for children to be able to go to school in places where people of very different religious faiths not only come to school but express their own faith in their own expression.
I mean, someone once said that if no prayer in the school means that kids can't pray, you know - well, you never had that on math tests.
You know, every time there's a math test, the kids are praying.
But the prayer in school cases don't say that children can't pray; they say that the school can't pray.
Hughes actually joined the city school board in Cincinnati, you know, and finally quit when kids were beat up because they refused to read out of the King James version of the Bible.
But the practical matter which brings me to the position that I'm in today was that we put together a proposal which - rather than somebody giving this paltry voucher that the Cleveland kids had to spend at existing schools - would have created things like money for transportation, which would have required private and public schools to hold open a certain number of positions for people who were poor, for people who were of other races, which would require desegregation, which would have required all of these things which are essential in a nation where a primary part of the story about education has been blatant, flat discrimination, and where we count on education to be a leveling factor.
It's very easy to say, hey, there's dollars going here to religious groups; that's not a good thing.
That is targeted discrimination, it is viewpoint discriminatory, it is treating the religious adherent, or religious schools, as if they are second-class citizens.
No student, no parent is compelled to send their kid to St. Pius High School or to the Torah Day School or to the Lutheran School.
We take a look at this case, and I think where the Sixth Circuit missed it - and we'll find out soon enough - is that there's really no choice here.
The fact of the matter is the history of the case speaks to a problem that cities unfortunately have had in this country.
It was a solution that may work, that provides parental choice, and that parental choice includes a religious-based school.
I mean, would there be any disagreement here if in fact the voucher program said, we're going to allow you to go to a school of your choice as long as it's not religious?
But the fact that a religious school is included all of sudden disqualifies the program.
And if you don't think that a choice program, even if it excluded religious schools -- in other words, the secular counterparts -- would be constitutional, then you're dealing with a monopoly of the public school system, which is failing not only unfortunately in Cleveland but in other places as well.
The parties have conceded, and the Sixth Circuit acknowledges, that you don't have a situation where this program was created to advance religion.
They didn't make that argument that it was for the purpose of advancing religion.
I suspect that if the case is argued, and I'm sure it will be argued well, that Justice O'Connor would be sympathetic to the concept that when you have a program that has secular alternatives, there shouldn't be this constitutional problem.
And I think that to say that this program advances religion because it happens to be that religious schools volunteered, if you will, or agreed to participate in this, and parents are choosing religious schools, the alternative is we penalize the religious schools and we penalize the parents for choosing religious schools, and then we're right back to the lousy schools in Cleveland.
I know Elliot's got a lot to say as well, but I just want you to focus in on not just the fact that a religious school is getting money from the government, but also that if you exclude that religious school from participation in its program, that it does show hostility for those religious schools.
I think it's the guys behind the curtain that frankly are attempting to undermine education for most kids and harm religious liberty in order to advance getting tax dollars for religious schools, not really for poorest kids or kids that are in public schools, but primarily for the people that are already in there.
Each taxpayer would decide to what society of Christians the money would go, or could direct that his tax dollars not support a religious society at all but go to support seminaries of learning, not unlike, one might argue, the choices that are involved in the voucher program.
"Not even three-pence," Madison said - they had three-pence then - "should be demanded of a taxpayer to support religion."
So inevitably, the effect of a program that directs money to private schools in that way is to support religion.
Some of the private schools don't have a church or synagogue that can provide the subsidy that those religious schools quite appropriately are providing.
And the result of that inevitably is that the taxpayer money will inevitably go to support religious groups, and, as Professor Lawrence pointed out, schools which even, point aside, that they may do an excellent job at teaching kids math and reading, their whole purpose is to promote and inculcate their particular sectarian religious views, and there is nothing wrong with that.
One goes to a public school and the other one goes to a Catholic school.
I went to Catholic school and then to a state university.
But I can tell you that I live in North Arlington and the Catholic school that my son and daughter went to was far more integrated, both economically and ethnically and racially, than the public school that my son goes to.