I am just a politician making some points in a debate in which a range of views are being expressed.
I accept your point that there needs to be more information about the new VEC community national school model and how it deals with faith formation, but I personally am not hung up on this issue.
I doubt the VECs teach faith formation in any more of an intrusive way than the vast majority of schools in Ireland, whose main role is just to educate, not to form faith.
I am o f the impression that VECs try to make pupils aware and respectful of the diversity of religion and none in a similar way to Educate Together schools.
Educate Together schools arrange for faith formation outside of school hours but in the school building.
There is a middle ground in this debate and there are many people somewhere in the middle on this issue rather than at your end of the spectrum (no religion in schools at all) and those that believe in denominational models as the best model.
Just to up date you on that Prime Time Programme - The Broadcasting Complaints Commission has just upheld a complaint against the programme under the category of Fairness, objectivity and impartiality.
To my mind the VEC is NOT part of the church (of any god) but people and parents in particular are being scare mongered constantly in this regard, i.e. that their children are somehow being indoctrinated and/or worse, socially excluded, in school life.
It's a pity that throughout your comments that we are still none the wiser about what goes on during the half hour everyday when religion is taught (almost 11% of teaching time).
This conversation is simply trying to find out information about what happens during religion time in these schools.
While you might disregard my point, you still haven't added to our knowledge about the VEC model.
Right now I have a problem with the VEC model because if children are segregated during religion time and Catholic religion is taught by default, this is not moving away from a church-run system, which the majority of Irish people want.
The fact that these schools are being allowed to expand without any evaluation even though they are state-run schools (everyone's business) and the fact they are still a pilot scheme worries me greatly.
Maybe it will be revealed all in September.
Are you a conspiracy theorist too Rozz?
In the new schools, the children are taught together at religion time (about 30 minutes every day) for at least 80% of the time during the school year.
As regards Primetime and the worries it created for you, I think you really have to forget that programme and wait for the next one they do because the BAI has ruled that "the subject matter was not treated in a fair, objective and impartial manner," RTE itself broadcast that finding just after the news on Monday evening.
Certainly, the community national school model must be evaluated (as you say) but I think that there is less to detract from and more to welcome in their model than many on the secular side of the debate would probably like to admit.
Opening up more and more VEC schools before the model is tried and tested is not only illegal, it's going to make it harder to rid the flaws once they become "culture" within a school.
All we have is a Prime Time investigation, which showed up all the flaws.
Both VECs and school boards of managements include representatives elected by the voters at local elections, in the case of VECs there are meetings that can be attended by the public and the press, minutes, motions, community representation, and so on.
On the issue of faith formation - this is not a fundamental principal as has been shown by Educate Together who chose at one time to do it during school hours and at another time to cease doing so - in any case don't most people argue for choice and therefore what if the parents in a school choose to faith formation during school hours, what then?
There was other comment on the programme that you might be interested in though, in a local media outlet 'Community Voice' and I attach link to their article on the Prime Time Programme you refer to below.
I am happy for the two pilot schools to check if their practices are working but the fact that three new VEC schools are opening this September shows that despite no feedback and no transparency, they are still expanding.
At present many of those parents send their children to catholic schools and have attached their identity to those schools, admire the work of the teachers, the principals and the boards of management of those skills.
Most people would understand that the process of change would involve the church in some way and that is what happened in relation to the church and its handover of control of local second level schools to the VEC via community schools and designated and of late non designated VEC multi denominational colleges.
The parents, and Principal both said they do not segregate children according to faith in the manner portrayed in the Prime Time Programme.
They say the programme was unfair in that the only parent shown was one who campaigned against the school but although a parent of a child at the schools concerned was interviewed by Prime Time, Prime Time chose not to show that parent during the programme.
Would you not give them the same benefit of the doubt in their choosing to send their children to that school/teach in that school, as you would give to the parents that send children to your school or teach at the school you teach in?
I had written a rather lengthy piece clarifying a few points you made but I feel we'll be going around in circles.
Two schools were opened and the plan was to see if their model of education worked.
This model was different from the two models that exist in Ireland.
The first is the denominational model where children are taught a specific religious programme within school time.
The most common of these types of school is the Catholic primary school.
In denominational schools, all children are indoctrinated in the teachings of the particular religion throughout the day though children can be withdrawn from discrete religion classes.
The other model available to children is the Educate Together model.
This model is known as a multi-denominational model.
In the Educate Together charter, this means that children are not discriminated based on the culture, race or creed.
Therefore, no religious instruction is taught during the school day.
Instead, an ethics programme is run where children learn about many belief systems together.
They also learn about spirituality, morality, environmental studies and equality.
Everyone learns together.
Children who wish to have religious instruction do so after school.
Firstly, who is going to teach faith formation to the children?
I assume it's the class teacher.
On this assumption, how can these teachers teach faith formation to Sikh, Jewish or Muslim children, when no teacher training college provides training in the Guru Granth Sahib, the Torah or the Koran?
All Irish undergraduate teacher training is done in Catholic or Church of Ireland institutions.
I think I can safely assume that any child from a minority is not given faith formation in their own culture.
That is the first (and very major) caveat.
A simple Google search reveals the plan.
From information received under the Freedom of Information Act, procedures show that the schools currently involved in the VEC primary model have "already been pre-configured to ensure that Catholic faith-formation classes will be offered within the compulsory school day", (Paul Rowe, The Irish Times, April 15, 2008).
Rowe continues, "children will be registered according to the religious identity of their parents, and teachers will be required to supervise their separation at set times during the week.
Only those faiths considered to be the 'main religions in the school community' will be provided with State-funded faith-formation teachers, and those that do not qualify will be taught a common ethics programme."
If you are lucky enough to be part of the Catholic community in your class, you get to stay there during religion time.
If you're not, it's the "other" class for you.
I think one can dress this up in as many ways as they can possibly think but this is segregation of children based on religious beliefs.
It says that children can learn together for most subjects but at a certain time, some of the children must leave the room.
In effect it is what happens currently in the majority of denominational schools, except this time the school can offer supervision to those choosing not to do religion classes.
No wonder the majority denominations are welcoming the model.
Essenitally, the VEC model is the current denominational model dressed up under a different name.
So why are so many people angry about this?
Children who wish for a religious education in school are catered for and children who don't get an ethics programme, supposedly similar to that given in Educate Together.
On one level, it's a fair question.
Isn't this a decent compromise?
There are obviously a lot of parents around who do wish for their children to have faith formation in school.
However, when the vast majority of schools in the country offer faith formation in Catholicism, why do we need another model of primary education that actively encourages the same when there are so few schools that offer an alternative?
According to a press release from Educate Together in 2007, the original Educate Together schools also provided FFISH but this was changed in 1978 due to the ethical difficulties surrounding them.
Would there be a minimum number of children required before a commitment to teach FFISH would be met?
What provision would be necessary to provide appropriate classroom space?
Who would source, recruit and pay teachers of specific religious instruction?
As the national school system is based on a single teacher delivering the whole programme, what obligations will be placed on that teacher about the teaching of religion?
What would be timetabled for children who come from families with a personal creed?
(Educate Together, 2007) Even in 1978, when Ireland was a much less multicultural society, Educate Together could not find answers to these questions and moved to a FFOSH system, which is widely praised internationally as a model for primary school education.
From reading the views of politicians such as Joanna Tuffy, (20th May 2010) and Brian Hayes (20th March 2010), they seem to view all schools, even Catholic Schools, as "in reality", multi-denominational.
It is clear from their articles that they don't see the problems the VEC model faces because they seem happy with the way Catholic primary schools have been dealing with the influx of children from other faiths.
I was hoping to answer my questions about the VEC primary model by writing this article but I have only ended up with more questions that I had when I started.
However, I believe all these questions could be answered with the biggest question mark I started off with.
Why are there no VEC primary school web sites so we can see what really happens inside the four walls?
A school that has a web site opens itself to the wider community.
Have the VEC got something to hide?
I've been trying to find out about our local VEC school here and they have one page piggy-backing off the County VEC site, with some photos & news about the student activity, and the visits of politicians etc, but nothing of substance about ethos etc.
There is a facebook page too!
It's my perception that this local school has a very Catholic bias, and I can't get the low-down on this from the school either on paper (I've asked) or on the net.
http://www.labour.ie/joannatuffy Joanna Tuffy
Is it because only two are opened and not for very long.
They are also not stand alone schools they are part of the VEC.
But give them time and they may have websites like VEC second level schools such as this one:
I am enthuasistic about the VEC in general because of its record at second and third level.
At second level they were before their time in introducing co educational and multi denominational education.
VECs brought on board the church as stakeholders in the education system.
That was a historical fact that they took on board.
They were innovative, providing education for those that otherwise would have been cast aside, such as those from disadvantaged backgrounds, those with illiteracy, prisoners,people returning for second chance education.
Long before universities introduced programmes such as access programmes to try and attract people from lower socio economic background to college, RTCs were already catering for a much wider cross section of students, opening their doors at night to people that couldn't study during the day and providing a flexible model of education that allowed a person to transfer from apprenticeship to certificate to diploma to degree to postgraduate.
Ballyfermot College of Education educated this year's Irish Oscar winner, and the three other Irish Oscar nominees, being the firt college to introduce animation studies in this country.
Community colleges and VEC second level schools in general, none of which are private schools, have produced some of the top achieving leaving certificate students while also catering for those that are not suited to the traditional leaving certificate or junior certificate and may instead take the Junior Certificate Vocational Programme, or the Leaving Certificate Applied.
In Collinstown Park Community College in my constituency in Neilstown the former Principal stated in an interview in the Irish Times a couple of years ago that between the years 1998 and 2003 that participation levels of the students there had increased by 500 per cent.
This in one of the most disadvantaged parts of the Country, a RAPID area.
It is a model of inclusive education lauded by late former Workers Party T.D. and Leader Tomas MacGiolla described Vocational Education Committes as providing as a system of education that was democratic, non-denominational, non-selective and innovative, which welcomed people that other educational institutions cast aside.
More than 95 per cent of primary school children attend catholic schools.
I think an excellent model in general are our national schools, whether they be catholic schools, Church of Ireland, or Educate Together.
The VEC is accountable to more than just parents, it is accountable to the wider community and the community does have an interest in the schools in the community, because they are state funded, payed for by the taxpayer, and the buildings should be open for other uses such as childcare, community meetings and so on.
At second level they are used for community education.
This idea of members of the wider community having a stake in the schools in the community is a core feature of VEC provided education.
One issue in relation to the primary schools is that the Government has delayed in introducing legislation for the VEC primary schools.
It has always been a feature of the accountability of VEC that it is underpinned by legislation and the need for legislation for primary schools is a matter that needs to be addressed.
One final point, the Educate Together model has a lot in common with the VEC, and they filled a gap in primary education in a similar way that VECs filled a gap at second level.
And the VEC wants to move into primary and likewise Educate Together wants to move into Second Level.
I note that above you highlight quotes from Paul Rowe identifying as a flaw in the VEC primary school model the fact that faith formation is taught during school hours.
Of course this issue should be looked at, and in that regard the VEC primary schools are pilot schools, but it is not an argument against the VEC primary school model existing any more than it was when Educate Together primary schools when they originally taught faith formation during school hours.
Thanks for the mention by the way and I hope my comment is helpful to you, which is an attempt to clarify my views, as a politician on this matter
I think the big question mark over the VEC model is its lack of transparency at primary level.
I don't accept that a school in the 21st century can get away with not having a web site.
You refer to the VEC being ahead of its time, but it is over 30 years behind its time if it is still believes that faith formation can still be done in school time.
If I want to find out about a school for a particular reason, the first thing I do is look for their web site.
If one searches for VEC primary schools on the Internet, you will find out the Catholic Church's opinion, you'll see Educate Together's view and you might find a few smatterings of opinions on discussion fora and blogs.
I want to find out why many politicians are highly enthusiastic about it, (Joanna Tuffy, 2010).
I want to find out why the Catholic church favours it over other models, (Archbishop Martin, 2007).
Therefore everything from Koranic studies to Confirmation preparation is done after school in Educate Together schools.
While there are many similarities between the Educate Together model and the VEC model with regards to enrollment policies, curriculum and ethical education, the fundamental difference is summed up well by Fintan McCutcheon, principal of Balbriggan Educate Together with his acronyms FFISH and FFOSH (Faith Formation inside/outside of school hours).
Some of the questions that Educate Together addressed were:
Simply enrolling children from different cultures does not make a school multi-denominational.
I believe if the state is to play an increasing role in future, which is highly likely, especially since the taxpayer is paying for the schools, the teachers etc. then the VEC has done a remarkable job at second level and can play a similar role at primary.
If there is so much in common between ET schools and VEC schools, and the only main difference being the issue of faith formation within school time (which you believe will be phased out anyway), why is there less of a political drive for ET schools?
During this 3-4 week period of school, who teaches the non-Christian religions?
the reason I ask this is because I have never met a qualified teacher with appropriate qualifications to teach Islam, Judaism, etc. 5.
I am also concerned that 3-4 weeks is considered enough by all parties to prepare a child for sacraments.
Another important factor is that the schools are state-run, which means they should be transparent (and secular - but that's a different argument).
Having just looked at some of your other postings I gather you are the principal of an Educate Together School.
Educate Together say they are multi denominational but they don't provide for any religious education during the school day.
Instead they teach what I would call an ethical programme during the 'religion' half-hour each day.
My impression is that this is basically a form of ethics and teaching about religions.
If the parents want religion taught in school for their children, it has to take place outside of the school day.
Some schools will make space available but parents sometimes have to pay then for religion to be taught to their children.
A community national school has to provide for religious education for children of all faiths (and none) during the school day in line with what their parents want.
The logic here is that if the state wants to move from catholic patroned schools then it makes a lot of sense to have a model that satisfies the catholic church as well as the other belief traditions.
This includes humanism and atheism.
Then it will be easier to hand over schools and parents will be happy as well because a lot of parents still want religious education for their children done at school (If nothing else, it saves them having to do it!)
As well as that, as you'd know, leaving children after school is not an option for a lot of parents, even if they could afford the classes.
The community (neighbours and friends of the same faiths) also has a role to play of course.
However, providing religious instruction for children of all faiths during the school day is not easy (as Educate Together discovered when they tried and failed at it in their early years - they had initially thought this was the right way to go but it turned out not to be the case, in their view).
At the end of a religion class 2 or 3 times a week, those who believe in a single god (at present mainly christians and muslims) are invited to think a prayer to their god (but not to Jesus).
For 3 - 4 weeks during the year, the children spend all religion classes tohether in their faith groups (in the current schools because of the children attending, those groups are catholic, christian, muslim and others).
All of the programmes for each faith group are written by the same writer so that they're all looking at the same moral themes other than the actual religious specifics.
They have a curriculum to follow which includes a comprehensively respectful approach to multiple faith formation, inside school hours.
At the end of every week throughout the year, children bring home a worksheet to their parents to fill them in on the week's lesson and to encourage their interest.
While the children are receiving some specific religious education, there is still much more required of parents and their (faith) community with this model (think of how prayer and religion was knitted into every part of your school day growing up!
That doesn't happen here!)
While the CNS will help to prepare children for the sacraments much more will be required of the other participants - their parents and their faith community.
Children are well used to being put into different groups for English, for support and lots of other things so it's not a big deal for them to change a class layout or format for faith purposes.
It is done quickly and simply in all cases and as the groups are actually quite general (believers in god, or not), the issue of numbers for any particular group has not arisen.
Anecdotal evidence so far is that the children and their parents are happy with the religion classes (but of course they'd need to be included in any assessment of the pilot programme).
The main point though is that parents from faith traditions (other than catholicism) should feel they are being valued and respected for who they are.
The community national schools provides for faith formation in line with the wishes of parents and that's very important.
You can't expect a child to leave their religious identity at the school door because they're afraid to mention it.
The new CNS model embraces and develops diversity and it helps children look at one another's practices with respect.
Surely this is a better preparation for the new Ireland than ignoring religion and difference in the reality of everyday school life?
It is also important that these new community national schools don't develop into some kind of 'anti-religion' society because for most people (me at least), religion is still important at some point in their lives.
Community national schools operate on a catchment area basis because schools should be an integral part of a community (they can also offer parent classes where possible and make the school available for other groups after school hours).
They don't keep enrolments for years in advance as that would not be inclusive of recent arrivals into the community.
Basically, Irish society now wants a primary school model that any parent will be comfortable sending their child to and be assured of getting a quality education (at the end of the day this is the most important thing for most parents).
With the new Community National Schools they can have religion or not but there is no extreme position involved.
While I don't agree that it is an inclusive model, I have to resign to the fact that if this is what parents want, this is what they'll get.
The ethics programme is a lot more than just teaching about religions.
so they you go you admit that theres no change, no progression and as in primary schools today faith formation is embedded in the entire curriculum so it shall remain.laws don't make it equal there is still catholic domination if not monopoly with 90%+ schools and especially with all the teacher training schools for primary being religious institutions(apart from the online place).
Judging by her comments on this post, there's no difference between Labour and Fianna Fáil on religious education policy.