"In addition, schools must make provision for religious education to promote education about religion and learning from religion and to encourage respect and mutual understanding.
"No child should be exempt from receiving Sex and Relationships Education (SRE).
The teaching of Sex and Relationships Education (SRE) can occur within single-sex classes in order to allow teachers to cater for specific needs during SRE sessions.
Impartial, fair and balanced teaching about all major worldviews, including nonreligious ones, in RE, provide all children an understanding of the range of beliefs found in a multicultural society and the values shared by most religions and ethical worldviews."
Prof. West and Dr Allen's evidence to Children Schools and Families Select Committee (2008)
"In my most recent research-I have written a paper on England, and a separate paper with Anne West on London-I was able to show that religious schools have higher ability and lower free school meal intakes compared with the neighbourhoods in which they are located.
To give you an idea of the magnitude of those effects, if we take a community school and a voluntary-aided religious school, both located in a neighbourhood with exactly the same levels of deprivation, the community school is likely to have about 50% more free school meal children than the voluntary-aided school.
Although they are located in relatively affluent parts of the country, on the whole they look much more like community schools than voluntary-aided religious schools in terms of their intake, relative to the neighbourhoods within which they are located.
There were criteria that allowed a degree of subjectivity and some that gave priority to certain groups of children, such as those whose parents attended the school, who had links to governors, and former siblings at the school.
Faith schools receiving state funding should therefore lose the right to select pupils on religious grounds.
We recommend that the requirement for compulsory school worship be abolished.
We recommend that the current system whereby the syllabus for religious education in state schools is set by local advisory councils (SACREs) be abolished and replaced by making RE a National Curriculum subject.
New research, published by the Institute for Public Policy Research (ippr) shows that secondary schools which are their own admission authorities are much less representative of their local area.
With both Labour and Conservative policy committed to increasing the number of Academies and Trust schools, ippr warns that Labour's efforts to strengthen the Admissions Code of Practice and the Conservatives' new opposition to expanding grammar schools is not enough to prevent selection in state schools.
• Faith schools which are their own admission authorities are ten times more likely to be highly unrepresentative of their surrounding area than faith schools where the local authority is the admission authority.
• Non-religious schools which are their own admissions authorities are six times more likely to be highly unrepresentative of their surrounding area than community schools for whom the local authority is the admission authority.
ippr's report also cites strong evidence of 'peer effects' on individual student performance and evidence that high levels of social segregation are associated with lower results overall."
"The latest findings of the Headspace survey of primary and secondary headteachers, carried out by Education Guardian and EdComs, and administered by ICM, shows that many heads are deeply concerned about the effects of faith schools on the education system.
Of the 801 headteachers who replied to the questionnaire - of whom 28% actually work in religious schools - 47% felt there should be either fewer or no faith schools, while 32% felt there should be no change.
Only 9% agreed with the government's policy of increasing the number of faith schools."
"The Commission feels able to support the continuing presence of faith schools in the state sector, even though there is little evidence to support the notion that faith schools educate children better.
It feels that preventing religious schools from operating in the state sector would simply lead them to move into the private sector, as occurs in Australia.
Parents choosing schools on grounds of religion is deemed acceptable - and there is a liberal argument that parents should be able to choose a religious education for their children if they so desire - whereas schools choosing parents on religious grounds is not.
We note that this will lead to some self-selection by parents into religious schools, but this is considered acceptable since faith schools would have to compete on the same terms as other schools."
"Educational mixing: This is closely linked to residential, and in our view it is desirable in principle that as many schools as possible, should have mixed intake so that children growing up can learn one another's customs and cultural backgrounds and accept that stereotypes and racism are unacceptable."
"Three faith secondary schools (Blue Coat, Crompton House and Our Lady's) admit no Muslims.
Liberal Democrat Simon Hughes said that where there were lots of schools in a community that were 'effectively their own admission authorities', such as church schools where church attenders had priority, it was hard to give 'a fair opportunity for all pupils to have access to all secondary schools'.
Responding, Children, Young People and Families Minister Sarah McCarthy-Fry said that all schools were obliged to abide by the admissions code, and said that with the work of the schools adjudicator - who was now entitled to look into all objections - would allow the Government to review the code and make improvements.
Simon Hughes (North Southwark and Bermondsey) (LD): Ministers have tried hard to amend the policy to make it better, but is it not still the truth that in local authorities where many or all schools are their own admission authorities it is sometimes very difficult to have a fair and flat playing field for applications?
For example, in areas where there are a lot of Church schools, people who go to church get a far better deal than people who do not.
Through that mechanism and also in the fact that we are now allowing the schools adjudicator to look into objections from wherever they come, we can continue to update the code and ensure that it is fair.
The following question was answered on 25 February 2009.
Mr. Sanders: To ask the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families what the proportion of students in receipt of free school meals is in (a) religious and (b) non-religious schools.
Primary, secondary and special schools( 1) : school meal arrangements by denomination of school( 2-) As at January 2008: England
Dr. Kumar: To ask the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families how many schools he and his predecessors have designated as being of a religious character in each of the last 10 years.
All faith schools are designated as having a religious character under the School Standards and Framework Act 1998 and the Religious Character of schools (Designation Procedure) Regulations 1998.
Ekklesia examines and analyses the work of faith schools and works for their positive reform.
It is a founder member of Accord which works to make admissions and recruitment policies in all state-funded schools free from discrimination on grounds of religion or belief.
• The impact of religious admissions on social segregation (sometimes called "cream skimming" or social selection) • Faith schools and school standards / attainment • Faith schools and community cohesion • The number of new faith schools • Faith schools and homophobia • Faith schools and recruitment • The number of schools of different types, and their denominations
Although the scope of evidence surveyed here is wide and cannot easily be summarised, it repeatedly gives cause for concern about the way that many faith schools operate, and the consequences of this for wider society.
"A new poll released by Accord has revealed the depth of public concern about faith school practices.
• 72% 'agreed or strongly agreed' that "all state funded schools should operate recruitment and employment policies that do not discriminate on grounds of religion or belief", with only 9 % disagreeing or strongly disagreeing.
Can Competition Improve School Standards?
Dr Rebecca Allen and Dr Anna Vignoles,
RISE and LSE: Secondary school admissions in England: Policy and practice (2009)
Prof. Anne West, Eleanor Barham and Audrey Hind
The situation is different with voluntary aided schools where there can be a high number of criteria relating to religion and religious practice, creating difficulties for parents/carers and allowing scope for discretion in many cases.
Faith Schools: Admissions and Performance - A Report by the House of Commons Library (2009)
A review of the current evidence on the relationship between admissions and performance in faith schools.
"Recent research on primary schools suggests that performance difference can largely be explained by prior attainment and background.
"Reasonable accommodations should be made to meet the religious needs of all pupils.
For many years now many schools have attempted to be inclusive of faith communities.
• provision of adequate private prayer space within schools; • recognising religious holidays which embrace all faiths; • flexible arrangements around school uniform to allow for religious and cultural differences; and • provision of suitable food in school canteens catering for all religious requirements.
The motivation behind schools making efforts to meet the religious and cultural wishes of parents and communities is often a desire to welcome diversity in the student/pupil population.
Many schools wish to have an ethos that brings together children from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds whilst making accommodations to meet individual needs."
"The Non-Statutory National Framework for RE and the requirements of local SACREs should apply equally to all schools and subject to the same inspection arrangements."
Databank of independent evidence on faith schools
This document has been produced by the Accord Coalition, of which Ekklesia is a founder member, to help researchers, journalists, campaigners and members of the public to find information about some of the policy implications of state funded faith schools and their practices.
The aim is to bring together and summarise high quality research from reliable sources, pointing in particular to the shortcomings of faith schools and where changes need to made, particularly in the area of admissions and employment.
With the exception of the 2009 poll commissioned by Accord from YouGov-itself a respected member of the British Polling Council-all evidence in the report is from sources independent of Accord and its members.
Some sources cited however are religious, such as agency Tearfund, and other institutions that work with churches such as the Runnymede Trust.
The evidence is also recent - all of it dates from 2001 or later and the majority was produced in the last two years.
Research and opinion polls have been organised in reverse chronological order below, followed by relevant parliamentary questions and statistics from the DCSF.
The polls and surveys in the report demonstrate that many members of the public have similar concerns as Accord, which is convinced that only legislative change will bring about an education system free from religious discrimination.
The survey, released to coincide with the committee stage of the Equality Bill, found that 57% of people 'agreed or strongly agreed' that "state funded schools that select students by their religion undermine community cohesion", while only 19% 'disagreed or strongly disagreed'.
The Case of Faith Schools in England (2009)
This paper measures the extent to which the presence of religious state-funded secondary schools in England impacts on the educational experiences of pupils who attend neighbouring schools, whether through school effort induced by competition or changes in peer groups induced by sorting.
It finds significant evidence that religious schools are associated with higher levels of pupil sorting across schools, but no evidence that competition from faith schools raises area-wide pupil attainment.
"Admissions criteria for community and voluntary controlled schools are, in the main, clear, objective and relatively simple for parents/carers to understand.
There is a case for a simplified procedure for determining religion and religious practice."
"Further analysis of GCSE results shows a different pattern of results for faith and non-faith schools with similar governance arrangements and control over admissions.
The report states that although the cohesion initiatives undertaken in Blackburn's schools in accordance with the duty are "positive" and "imaginative", they are insufficient.
The "level of segregation in schools is high, growing and more extensive than the level of residential segregation would suggest", with a number of faith schools "a particular issue".
Although the report calls on faith schools to "reconsider their admission policies in light of the impact on cohesion", some schools in the town have already made clear that they do not intend to change their polices.
At the launch of the report, Prof Cantle stated that faith schools with religious admission requirements are "automatically a source of division" in the town.
A 2009 Tearfund survey found that 26% of British people attend church at least once a year, with "AB social class (34%) and owner occupiers without a mortgage (32%) among the groups overrepresented and "C2 social class (21%); DE social class (22%); single people (19%) and council tenants (19%)" among those underrepresented.
It should also be noted that only 15% of adults attend church at least every month, but many school admissions policies require regular church attendance at a particular church over the course of several years.
In an oversubscribed school, such policies will inevitably select out all but the most religious and/or most organised and determined parents.
"Staff in secondary and primary faith schools are only half as likely to say that homophobic bullying is a serious problem in their schools compared to staff in non-faith schools.
Two in five staff in faith schools say that homophobic bullying never occurs in their schools.
However, gay pupils in faith schools are more likely to experience homophobic bullying than their peers in non-faith schools.
We provide estimates for the effect of attending a Faith school on educational achievement using a census of primary school pupils in England.
Instead, we partially control for selection into religious schooling by tracking pupils over time and comparing attainments of students who exhibit different levels of commitment to religious education through their choice of secondary school and residence.
We then go on to show that our estimates vary substantially across pupil subgroups that exhibit different levels of sorting on observable characteristics into Faith schooling, and provide bounds on what the 'Faith school effect' would be in the absence of sorting and selection.
Pupils with a high degree of observable sorting into Faith schools have an age-11 test score advantage of up to 2.7 percentiles.
On the other hand, pupils showing a very low degree of sorting on observables have zero or negative gains.
It appears that most of the apparent advantage of faith school education in England can be explained by differences between the pupils who attend these schools and those who do not."
There was a small improvement amongst Roman Catholic schools in 2006/07 but a slight worsening of the situation for Church of England schools."
The researchers examined religious schools in their full historical, cultural, political and educational context and consulted with over 1000 stakeholders (teachers, parents, students, educationalists, governors etc).
Faith schools should be for the benefit of all in society rather than just some.
Children's rights are as important as parents' rights.
Despite histories based on challenging poverty and inequality, and high-level pronouncements that suggest a mission to serve the most disadvantaged in society, faith schools educate a disproportionately small number of young people at the lowest end of the socio-economic scale.
"In most cases the full civil rights of LGBT staff and pupils will not be inconsistent with the right to religious freedom.
The aim of achieving equity and community cohesion which takes into account the needs of religious groups and those of no religious affiliation should be based on a reciprocal approach where all schools whatever their existing status play their part in achieving those aims.
"The issue of collective worship is in need of re-examining, particularly its requirement within the 1988 Education Reform Act to be 'wholly or mainly of a Christian character' in order to eliminate the need for withdrawal from school assemblies.