Like most parents, we struggle to find the time and energy to keep seeking the fair go this country is famous for.
The support of CRE, as it is currently provided, defies logic on so many levels.
There is evidence on child development younger children learn in a more concrete way, so we know they are impressionable when beliefs being taught as fact by untrained volunteers and an unevaluated curriculum.
There are countless examples of people with religious values, even people in authority in the church, committing sins against children that defy their espoused values, and bloody wars are fought over faith, so teaching CRE offers no evidence of improving society.
The resources are there to offer better alternatives, as evidenced by schools who do not inflict CRE upon families; and there are religious schools for those who choose them.
We teach values by what we do, not just by what we say, and by reinforcing rather than embracing difference CRE in state schools is actually doing harm.
My children attend a state school in Melbourne's leafy outer east... Evonne Paddison may be shocked to know there is a "small, secularist group" alive and kicking here too, even though we are not "inner-urban".
I continue to feel incredulous that children at a secular school should have to opt OUT of religious education, and hope that eventually this system will change.
Our school's provider is Access Ministries, and during the past week I have been appalled by their attempts to gain further influence in our secular school, this time via the government's National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program (NSCSWP).
On Wednesday 29th Feb, parents were invited to attend a forum at which Ainsley Carr, a representative from ACCESS Ministries, was present to answer our questions about the National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program.
She was, of course, also there to promote ACCESS Ministries as 'the best man for the job'.
The school Principal was also present at the forum.
Myself and other parents attending were surprised to learn that the closing date for NSCSWP grant applications was Friday 2nd March at 8pm, giving our school little more than 48 hours to finalise an application and decide on an appropriate provider/recipient who could best meet the needs of our school community.
Given that ACCESS Ministries was the only provider attending the forum, some parents expressed concerns about the possibility that, were we to nominate ACCESS Ministries as the funding recipient, proselytising would occur in our school.
Ms Carr assured us that would not happen, and said proselytising and evangelism are prohibited under the program guidelines.
She said that while ACCESS Ministries Chaplains were drawn to chaplaincy roles because of their Christian faith and values, their intention was not to push their personal religious beliefs onto other people, but to offer a variety of support services that would improve student wellbeing and meet the diverse range of needs within the school community.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.
The brochures read, "Victoria's young people need to know God cares for them no matter who they are or what they have done... Young Victorians need Christian school chaplains from ACCESS Ministries.
Towards the end of the publication there is a photo of the (now infamous) Evonne Paddison, together with a list of her credentials, and a description of her demeanor - "There's a passion for life at work here... It's in the way she's as comfortable lobbying for chaplaincy at Parliament as she is using 'Jerry the Puppet' to enthrall a tiny Prep student."
It states, "Our vision is to transform a nation... it means steering ACCESS Ministries through a phase of intense growth... and ultimately it means reaching every school student in Victoria.
I wish ACCESS Ministries were on trial, and I hope one day they (and Jerry the Puppet) will be barred from spreadin' the love at state schools.
As for our particular school, fortunately, our Principal appears to be listening to our concerns and has acknowledged that further parental consultation is warranted.
Hi I am working with my school to have a circular to ALL parents explaining what the SRI program is and what children who do OPT OUT will be doing during this time.
I encourage all parents approach your Principal to request this simple service to parents.
I anticipate that once parents understand the facts, many more will OPT OUT.
I have found that many parents opt in because they actually think the kids are doing multi-faith studies - they have a view they have formed based on the belief that our state schools are secular.
As I insinuated in my previous post, it is extremely disappointing that the only supporters of religious education in its current format who post their comments on this forum are mind numbingly idiotic, clearly have no grasp of the facts whatsoever, have no sensible comments to offer - in fact are insultingly rude towards free speech, make completely ridiculous statements, usually with respect to immigration and THEIR racial intolerance, and to top it all off, certainly can't spell to save themselves.
I cannot fathom how they can consider themselves Christians on the one hand and then proceed to write such incredibly awful untruths and propaganda!!
I have been fascinated through my son's first year of school to see the changing views of parents as they have discovered more and more that CRE is NOT a general religious overview teaching about Christmas and Easter but superhero biblical stories and prayer.
One parent pulled their son out after a particularly poorly written and educationally-devoid storybook about Peter's god-given jail bust - they actually hadn't realised that they could make that choice until talking to us.
Unfortunately most are reluctant to take the stand of actually opting out but they certainly don't particularly like the curriculum.
Unfortunately our school seems quite implicit in this.
The CRE is NEVER listed on the monthly timetable, and there are two annual school church services for which your child will be taken out of the school unless you explicitly in writing state that they are not attending (and they then spend that hour doing a pointless colour in)!
I have to sign a YES permission for them to do just about anything else, even when it does not involve leaving the school grounds yet, if this note got lost (not hard in a prep's schoolbag) my child would be taken out of school and preached at without my permission or presence.
Good on you young parents who care enough not to simply comply.
Make sure your children understand that you are giving them this breadth.
I have a child who did not realise the value of our giving her this breadth, she sees it as not having given her a group!
I tell her I have given her 'humanism', questioning intelligence, openness.
I just want to show my support for FIRIS.
You're doing a great job campaigning a worthy cause.
If I may, I just want to add my 2 cents into the topic.
From the perspective of a CRT (relief/substitute teacher), I've had to sit through a few Religious Education (RE) classes myself, as I was legally obligated to look after the volunteer.
I've been pretty upset for a while that these classes can be taught in a public school for several reasons:
* My personal opinion is that "Religious Education" should teach as the name says, religion, meaning ALL religions (Well, more than just the 3 judeo-christian religions) I think that either there should be a subject that encompasses ALL religions or get rid of RE altogether.
I bet you, if there was such a subject, many parents would be up in arms at having their children exposed to other religions with differing views and gods.
If parents want their children to have religious classes, they should go to a religious school.
* Students who are SUPPOSED TO BE ABSENT from these classes have nowhere/no one to look after them.
I have had students that had to sit through the classes which effectively means that they've just undertaken the lesson with everyone else when they should've been absent.
Great sense of responsibility of the school :-/ What confounds this problem further is that while the RE volunteers are supposed to only have 30 minutes, they tend to take longer which means that it eats into students lunchtime because they're FORCED to be there.
It's very unfair and I have felt sorry for them.
But as a CRT, you have little say in the matter and have to let things run their course.
To finish up, it's not really to do with teaching religion in schools but I find it unfair and at odds that people cannot teach in a religious school unless you have been acredited to do so but at the same time, the people of the same background can just waltz right in and preach...I meant teach.
I hope that your campaign and foundation grows and I thankyou for your time.
Damien, please don't make any further useless comments, particularly as none of them were valid suggestions about how this current situation could be solved!!
Particularly annoying is that you can't spell atheist properly- perhaps you need to return to school!
As a primary school student in the seventies (in Victoria)I was subjected to religious education for one week- even as a grade 2 student i realised how shambolic the so-called teaching was.
Children were being bribed with chocolates and lollies to answer questions about Jesus- how on earth can this be considered 'teaching'?
I discussed this with my parents and was promptly withdrawn from classes.
Whilst the rest of the class had RE I was sent to the school library.
I am still astonished that this situation has not changed at all 35 years later!!
I think it is plain for any objectors to the FIRIS campaign to see that the overwhelming theme is that the majority of parents, including myself, want eduction for their children about different religions and ethics, not regarding a particular religion as is the current situation.
Regardless of whether or not the secular school system had christian values at inception, for some people who may not realise, this is 2012!!!!
RE in its current guise has NO ROLE to play in modern secular schools.
I support this cause.I was a CRE teacher until the end of 2010 when I resigned from Access because of unfair treatment from the paid Access staff,with no grievance procedure for me to follow.False claims were made against me ,also not addressed through any proper process and I am still waiting for justice .
I could not continue to volunteer for a supposed "Christian" organization that does not practise Christian values.
Access is autonomous-it is not accountable to anyone!
This is since 2006 when the board structure was changed.Before this it was CCES-Council for Christian Education in Schools and was accountable to the Victorian Council of Churches.Not many people are aware of this-particularly School Principals and supporting churches who just think Access is the same as CCES.THe curriculum has been changed and is now "fundamental" in content,with very basic cartoon-style illustrations that I believe dishonour the people and stories portrayed.CRE teacher training has been reduced to about 4 hours.There are at least three clergy who have resigned as teachers because of concerns with the content.I raised some concerns about the material given to students but was not responded to for 4 months and then the issue was not addressed.One concern was about the story of Jesus turning water into wine,presented as an example of Jesus caring for his friends-by giving them alcohol-this was for grade 1 and 2, with the teacher notes suggesting you could say if you were at a party and the wine ran out people might go home !
not a responsible message when we have such a problem with alcohol in our society.The only response from Access was that this story was used to show that Jesus is powerful.There are more examples I could give.It is quite frightening that this organization is the main provider of Special religious education in Victoria and the only accredited provider of Christian religious education with a theological position that is fundamental.So even the Christian viewpoint is biased.
I believe there should be a religious studies programme in State schools teaching about many of the world religions and taught by trained teachers as I do believe it is very important to learn about the religious beliefs and traditions in order to encourage and nurture understanding ,tolerance and delight in the diversity.All the main religions share the basic Golden Rule-do unto others what you would have them do to you or expressed as don't do to another that which you would not like done to you.
I do believe that such a programme could be begun in Grade 1 with learning about the different festivals ,progressing to stories from sacred texts and history of the different faiths.
In the schools in which I taught children not doimg CRE were sat in another part of the room or in the computer space between classrooms.I am sorry that I didn't think to ask could there be another way for them,though the classroom teachers were very caring of them.I am sorry that I hadn't thought about the segrating effect of the students doing?not doing CRE-it is such an important issue.
Religious instruction is all schools in Australia should be banned completely.
All the isms are out.
Your campaign seems aimed at allowing more religions more access to our children.
Your campaigning for the wrong answer.
Shame on Alan Jones on Sunrise this morning supporting Christian indoctrination in government schools.
I have emailed Sunrise and have reminded them that we are not a Christian nation, we are a secular nation, I also sent them a link to this website and asked them to support your cause.
In school scripture lessons are the boys and girls taught that God's word lasts forever, that his commands in the Old Testament are valid today?
Isaiah 40:8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God shall stand for ever.
Are the boys and girls taught that God wants us to kill those people who worship another God?
In Deuteronomy 13:6-10 God tells us to kill by stoning to death any friends or family who worship a god which is different than our own.
I suppose that the boys and girls are given a sanitised version of the Bible, that they are kept in ignorance of all the God commanded rape, murder, theft and destruction.
Our schools should be secular.
If individuals want to indulge in religion, they should do so in their own time, and teach their children their religious doctrine outside school.
Hi, GROW UP!
If you want to teach for an hour a week without pay, a class that embraces all religions then go ahead.
I am sure a lot of schools would appreciate it, but these classes are taught by church volunteers.
As a teacher, I am literally awe-inspired by how petty this campaign is, not everyone is christian that is true, but there are other options for students during this time.
If you want a system that works, you should look at a small school just north of Newcastle called Anna Bay Primary school.
Either Christian, for those parents that want it, or a multicultural class for parents who want their children to learn diversity.
Because the parents want them to have greater knowledge.
In saying that, Australia was founded as a Christian Nation, not a multicultural one.
It is through our openness that we became multicultural.
I completely agree with the teaching of multiculturalism, but by asking to take away our children's Christian teachings, if that's what we so choose for them to do, is taking away our choice as parents, just like this site believes your choice has been taken away.
For anyone who reads about Australia, you know it is a Christian country, predominantly, and our census supports this.
The people who migrated here know this.
So I support the teaching of other religions, but not by taking away a culture that has been happening in our school system since the first school was established.
There will ALWAYS be Christianity, Islam, Buddhism etc.
Learn to accept it and move on.
The reason this "movement" wont take any affect is if you continue to allow the extremist views AGAINST other religions to post on your site.
Hi Liam: If we have allowed any comments that are intended to harm others, please notify us - there are many people in Australia who have left religion, and want to raise their children outside of religious teaching, we've found that many of these people have had personal experiences that have led them to have a negative view of religion - a secular society is one that explicitly recognizes the right of citizens to choose and pursue religion outside of the authority of government, but institutions that are set up for "the public" should not be venues for Christian Ministry - that is what churches are for - and as you say we are blessed with a wide diversity of religious traditions in Australia.
I love it when people have absolutely no idea of what they are talking about.
Religeous Instruction as I was taught back half a century in Queensland Schools went like this.
We had a half hour period once a week, where we could go to a room and receive religeous instruction and techings as per our parents wishes, and denominations of our parents choosing.
Those who's parents decided they did not want instruction went to another room for those who did not participate.
It gave kids the opportunity to learn a little about their chosen religeon.
Now I still fail to see whay this needs to be in schools at all, because all of these kids should get Sunday (or another day depending on religeon) teachings at their Sunday School.
Most religeons think once a week on weekends is enough, and the others have special schools for their teachings, eg Muslim, and Catholic.
So the whole argument and the neccessity for this ridiculous movement becomes redundant.
Allow teachings for kids to the parents wishes as has been done for decades, and as provided by the various religeous groups, or let them stay in class and study something.
How complicated is that.
Or if you still find something to complain about, stop ALL religeous teaching in schools, it's not what they are there for anyway, and let them learn at home and in Church.
I think it is really sad that you and your organisation are expending so much energy and resource trying to discredit what is essentially a positive experience for many (granted not all) kids and families throughout victorian state schools.
After reading your website it seems to me that the RIS issue is more a smoke screen for a deep seated anti creation campaign.
If you want to promulgate an anti creation theory then do so.... but don't use the platform of kids, and primary schools to surreptitiously communicate your views.
Albeit, it is a great way to get attention.
The irony here is that you are doing the very thing that you are accusing ACCESS ministries of.
Step out from behind the smoke screen and tell us what your real agenda is.
Steve, your suggestion of FIRS running an anti creation campaign is ludicrous.
Surely you can't deny the fact that atheism is a form of belief as are all the other isms.
The only issue we all have is that 97% of the SRI teaching is Christianity- the campaign has nothing to do with what may or may not be true ie creationism, evolution etc .
We are purely acknowledging the fact that modern day society is completely unlike the 1950s when the education department laws were enacted allowing for religious education in public schools.
There is a much higher percentage of atheists and agnostics now as well as well as all of the other major religions being well represented in our multicultural society.
The number of actively practicing Christians is dropping and what we are basically saying is that we would be happier for our children to be taught comparative religion not just Christianity as not all of us are Christian ie if religious education must be done within school hours.
Otherwise, it should be an extracurricular activity that people can chose to attend if they wish.
The fact that there is so much heated debate on this topic only illustrates how deeply personal the subject of religion is for most of us and hence why the teaching of one specific religion only should not play a role in modern government schools.
My six year old attends a school with diverse students, but CRE is promoted as the only option.
She is at school to learn and make friends, not to be put behind a curtain in the corner by herself, or with a couple of other children, to read (which most preps can't do independently).
We do not want her to attend CRE, but don't blame her for not wanting to have to stand out and take a position on a bigger issue - why is government putting small vulnerable children in this position?
We ARE a multicultural society, so get over it.
Hi Here is a letter I have submitted to Peter Garrett, Federal Minister for Education, and to Martin Dixon State Minister, I encourage everyone to start writing, its what Access Ministries are asking from the community and doing to undermine the the fact they have to be accountable.
I am also writing to my school council asking that they request an explanation from access ministries and that a formal policy regarding the treatment of Opt out students is implemented.
Mr Garrett I wish to raise my concern with funding of Access Ministries to have a near exclusive, and in Victoria compulsory, provision of Christian Religious Education.
My question is why is a 5 year old even being told about marriage and the rapture (yes the good rise up and will be returned the bad will die).
Maintain an inclusive school curriculum that does not require any student to withdraw from class on account of different religious beliefs 2.
Formally cease the practice of volunteer-run special religious instruction (SRI) during school hours 3.
Follow an objective, fair and balanced comparative syllabus for education about religions and beliefs 4.
Treat all religious organisations who wish to use the school facilities outside of the school day with transparent and equitable policies.
Mr Garrett we need you to act, the vocal minority of Access supporters have been extracting favour and finance from the public purse and now consider themselves above scrutiny or question.
They are excluded from working with children checks in Victoria but a Buddhist volunteer requires one.
As an secularist I have no options - ethics is prohibited, is this Australia of the 21st century, is this an education revolution?
Hi all - as former RE teacher, I'll add my two cents to the discussion.
Here is an email I just sent to our elected government members.
I received training by Access Ministries at the Church Of Christ Theological Seminary (Mulgrave) and volunteered my efforts at Elwood State Primary School in 1994.
I can attest that during my RE year, it was not uncommon to speak to the children, at every opportunity, using all teaching aids - about the Lord Jesus and his gospel with a view to planting a seed of faith.
I have searched in earnest for a good secular school but I was concerned at the blurring of church and state boundaries with the proliferation of Christian RE throughout most of these schools.
There are multiple schools in Mount Waverley but there is no product differentiation when it comes to RE/RI.
I was shocked to see the curriculum had not changed to reflect the multi-cultural, multi-ethnic, multi-faith, secular, rational and pluralistic demographics of Australia.
There are many parents who are feeling pressured to conform and do not want their children feeling isolated or outcast.
You can remove these discriminating barriers that are separating us in order to create a more equitable school environment that caters to open and critical thinking, such as a course taught by University trained personnel in comparative religion / ethics / philosophy.
With respect politically, I always find it strange how our conservative politicians favor economic privatization but don't apply the same free-market ethos to religion?
My husband and I were shocked-and remain so- when in prep we had to request that he NOT attend RE in a state school( I was equally shocked that it was so "creationist") Every year we have had to go to some effort to make this request( explaining that we do not pay the RE charge etc) and there are certainly no adequate provisions made for him, and the very few others ( in some years he has been the only one),in a school that is otherwise more than adequate academically.
This situation cannot continue to exist-I thought as a child my own children would live in more enlightened times!
"Thank you for your email stating your opposition to the current policy relating to religious education in government schools.
The Government is satisfied with the existing practice, which allows parents and students to opt out of religious instruction in government schools if they do not wish to participate or if they have any issues with it.
Unfortunately, the federal minister for education, Peter Garrett, is a born-again Christian so we are most unlikely to get any support from him.
More misfortune comes with the compulsory introduction of fear and sin, breaking down of parents as primary points of reference for everything in life, reduction in education about science.
I have been so pleased to have come across the FIRIS website - I'm not alone!!
My son is in his Prep year at the moment and I was under the misguided assumption that he was being taught about all religions and that the class was being delivered by a qualified teacher.
After speaking at length with his Prep teacher and the Deputy Principle I have recently informed the school in writing that he will no longer be attending the class.
This decision has not been taken lightly and my husband and I have deliberated about this at length.
I am absolutely furious that the current system is so heavily weighted towards the interests and agenda of ACCESS Ministries, rather than in the best interests of the child.
Thankfully, my son's Prep teacher is a very good teacher and I have come to an arrangement with her that I will send an educational activity book (literacy-based) with my son for use during the time he will not be in CRE.
Another issue I raised with the Deputy Principle was the complete absence of information for parents about what was included in the CRE curriculum and the role of ACCESS Ministries etc.
Even if the regulations were changed, I was told that it would be unlikely for the school to change it's attitude because we live in an area surrounded by a number of very large evangelical churches that donate money to the school and many of the students belong to those churches.
I wish that this organisation would do it's research and expend its energy a bit more wisely.
Just what else do the people who voted for aim no. 4 think the religions want to do at their school premises outside of school hours?
If they can't prosthelytize during school hours, they'll promote some or other 'club', or find some other way to get your children involved and listening to their Bronze Age nonsense in a way that is pursuasive to their cause.
I implore you to make a 180 degree about-face on aim 4 insisting that no religious group or person can enter the school grounds AT ANY TIME WHATSOEVER to promote or undertake any action that could be seen to be promoting any religion in any manner whatsoever.
Your strident objection to #4 of our aims is noted, and FIRIS is does not have a position on what the "transparent or equitable" policy should be - only that the policy be clearly stated and principled.
How exactly you view transparency and equality to be "devastating and appalling" is difficult to understand, unless what you are saying is that the existence of religion is itself "appalling".
Overall you seem to be a great ally to the religious elements who claim that the agenda of atheists is not to promote religious toleration and peaceful co-existence in a pluralist society, but to use the law to impose their religious opinions on others.
In pursuing a policy objective, FIRIS does not aim to "stamp out bronze age nonsense", but rather to create the conditions where religious groups are not using the authority of the government to advance their beliefs.
what is needed is a group that can come into schools and teach moral/ethics as well as 'belief systems' of the world.
So what is needed is a secular organisation that can take the place of the religious.
My view is SRI/E presented to children is a dangerous abuse of the privileged time that should be spent on education SRI/Eis not fact or evidence based education, in fact it is like no other hour in public schooling.