Fewer said that their children experience more variety, including cooperative learning, independent research, and hands-on activity in labs or classroom settings.
Technology use was routinely criticized.
Only 11 percent of parents felt that "technology is used effectively to promote student learning"; more than 65 percent disagreed.
Even in cases where technology was available, it tended to be confined to labs that students used either to take a "computer course" or for special projects, such as word processing assignments.
In the view of the parents in this study, there was little integration of technology into normal instructional routines, except in relatively rare and notable cases.
One Greenlawn parent observed, "my child uses a computer at home and in the public library, watches high quality science and history programs on cable TV...then goes to school and steps back 30 years."
Finally, parents perceived that schools did little to adapt instruction for students with special needs, talents, and interests.
Only 18 percent of parents felt that "this adjusts its instruction to meet different student needs."
This reflects the preponderance of whole-group instruction noted earlier and the difficulty teachers face in adapting instruction when confronted with so many students with special needs.
Willingness to adapt instruction is highly idiosyncratic; some teachers did it routinely, others did not.
A Middleboro parent said, "Mr. B gives different assignments and different tasks to almost everyone and my [learning disabled] son was very successful in his class.
His real problem came in English.
Mr. R said, 'I treat everyone the same way.
You either do it or you don't.'
This willingness (or lack thereof) to discuss options for students with special needs and talents is one of the most compelling bits of evidence that parents use in judging whether the school is "responsive" to their child.
Parent and Public Relations
Often, when parents said they found the school unresponsive, they elaborated by saying that it really "lacked effective ways of dealing with routine problems."
(22 percent).
But that seems to escalate the problem.
There should be some other way to deal with routine problems.
Because of the structure of the elementary school, where the point of contact is clear, home and school relations are seldom an issue.
When a child reaches the middle level, the issue is quite different.
Not only are parents confronted with a larger number of adults who work with their child, but middle level youngsters are notorious for not facilitating effective communication between the home and the school.
Because of that set of circumstances, schools that have a systematic, planned public and community information program are seen by parents as both more receptive to them and more responsive to their children.
Conversely, schools that do not engage in planned public relations are seen as unapproachable and unresponsive.
Related to parent and community relations is the problem of inconsistent communication from the various units of the district.
One parent said, "I talked with my kid's elementary teacher about the little anxieties I had about sending him to the middle school next year.
She said, 'I'd be concerned, too.
I don't know what they do down there, but they sure come here unprepared for high school work."
Even worse, such mixed messages come from the middle level school itself.
Parents in every community reported that, when they asked a question about a school practice they were told by the middle level teachers, "I don't know why we do it.
If it were up to me, I'd do it differently."
One Eastboro parent said, "This thing (teaming) is a disaster.
I'm surprised they learn anything at all.
Everyone hates it, but no one does anything about it."
Both the fact that it was a disaster and the universal hatred for teaming were probably questionable conclusions, but such inconsistent messages do little to inspire confidence in the middle level school.
It is clear that for every issue raised above, for every parent complaint, for every anecdote reported by parents, we can provide a logical explanation for why the schools do what they do, or why teachers behave as they behave.
Unfortunately, if we do so, we miss the fundamental message from these studies.
Our job is not to explain why we do things that people find distressing; true school reform means we work with our communities in an open collaboration to identify concerns and try to change what we do to benefit students and their families.
To do that, we must begin by listening--quietly and sincerely--until we truly hear what our clients are telling us about needed reforms in middle level education.
About the Authors
J. Howard Johnston is professor of secondary education, University of South Florida, Tampa, and Ronald D. Williamson is assistant professor of education at the University of North Carolina-Greensboro.
Looking for reasons, some point to the dynamic nature of the students they serve; others to the natural concerns of parents watching their children turn into adolescents; still others to the transitional nature of the institution itself, which bridges the nurturing environment of the elementary school with the competitive demands of the high school.
Regardless of the reasons for their place in the spotlight of many districts, middle level schools clearly receive a lot of attention, invite careful and often critical scrutiny, and engender strong public opinions about what they do and how they do it.
These community studies--which focused on the views of teachers, parents, and the general public--are instructive for school leaders who wish to build strong community consensus and support for the middle level school.
The schools in these communities do many things extremely well; the large majority of students are successful and happy as a result of attending them.
That is the purpose of the article: to listen to the voices of our clients as they tell us what inspires or destroys their confidence in us to help their children succeed.
Three middle schools serve the population, each reflecting the ethnic and economic composition of its local community, from a largely white and affluent population on one side of the town to a more ethnically and economically diverse group on the other side.
Nearly 85 percent of high school graduates attend some form of higher education.
During the 1970s, the district experienced a sharp decline in enrollment, a trend that was reversed in the late 1980s and 1990s as people left the city so their children could be enrolled in the higher performing suburban schools.
Approximately 80 percent of the high school graduates go on to higher education.
The community has remained stable over time, with some growth in the sections adjoining the city and airport areas.
The minority population grew approximately 25 percent during the 1970s and 1980s, and has remained stable since then.
Always a high-achieving community, recent studies showed that White students did very well but minority students achieved at a much lower level, prompting a district commitment to reduce the achievement gap within five years.
Nearly 90 percent of this community's students reported participating in postsecondary education.
To identify the specific concerns of the parents and public in these communities, three approaches were used: surveys, individual and group interviews, and exit interviews with parents removing their children from the public middle school for a private alternative.
Nearly 400 parents and other community members were interviewed individually or in small groups; 1,900 parents and community members were surveyed; and 325 parents participated in exit interviews.
Key word and trend analysis of interview data confirmed these themes and elaborated them with details and examples from parents' experiences.
The categories into which parent and public concerns grouped themselves were anonymity; curriculum; rigor and challenge; safety, sociability, and civility; responsiveness; instruction; and parent and public relations.
For parents, the most dramatic difference between the elementary and middle level school was size.
First, parents reported a pervasive sense of anonymity, both for their child and for themselves.
Only 39 percent felt that "there is an adult in this school who knows my child well and can offer advice and assistance."
One parent said, "How can a teacher who must deal with 140 kids a day, some with pretty bad behavior or academic problems, be expected to pay much attention to my kid?
"When my child had a problem in elementary school, I called the teacher.
One parent noted that "my kid deals with 11 different adults a week.
Even involved parents said they had difficulty contacting the right person for each situation; for parents who are hampered by busy work schedules or limited English proficiency, the school presents a particularly anonymous face.
It seems they do a lot of projects."
They acknowledged that life was "interdisciplinary" and that real problems called for skills and knowledge from a variety of disciplines, but they were sometimes baffled by the topics and content of units of study.
In one district, a parent noted that "the curriculum seemed to stop while they spent two weeks studying apples.
Another said, "I think my kid writes rather poorly, yet she brings home A's in English and social studies.
Related to this issue of rigor and challenge is the problem of equating rigor with the amount of work students are expected to do.
Unfortunately, parents fail to see that as increasing rigor or challenge; indeed, they report being frustrated when their calls for a "more rigorous" program result only in more of the same kind of work their child has always done.
Several parents in Greenlawn said, "My kid is on the homework team.
In the same school, others noted that their children were on "the project team," a group that assigns little homework, but expects students to produce complex interdisciplinary projects every month or so.
During interviews, a number of parents said they did not see many adults in the hallways during class passing, and that supervision in the cafeteria and other common areas seemed to be assigned to a relatively small number of adults.
In contrast, in schools where parents agreed with the statement "students are well supervised in this school," they also were inclined to agree that "students here are courteous and polite to adults and one another."
"Responsiveness" is a broad concept, covering everything from the school's willingness to make program adjustments for a student because of special need, to the teacher's willingness to give a student extra help when he or she needs it.
Interviews confirmed that parents do not view responsiveness as simply acceding to their requests; rather, it implies that the school adopts an assertive stance in offering help to their child, sometimes before the parent even knows it is necessary.
"My child's elementary teacher gave the impression that she had it all under control...that she was pretty well together," said one Middleboro parent, "but now her teachers seem to be overwhelmed by the number of kids, the number of classes...everything."
And, while these observations are made with great sympathy for the demanding job middle school educators face, they still undermine parent confidence that the institution is prepared to deal effectively with their child's needs.