"As religious educators, we see the immense importance of being a knowledgeable Christian in today's world.
We strongly believe that we are not entirely educating for the present, but with the future in mind.
It is our hope that all our students will come to an understanding and insight of their own personal worth, dignity, value and sacredness, within the framework of being called to a continuous and ongoing relationship with Jesus Christ."
-Sister Patricia Weldon, OSF
Click here to register your child for religious eduation > Online Registration Temporary offline: Stay tuned
The Catholic Bishops of the United States remind parents that they are the primary teachers of their children.
We now become partners with you in the education of faith and Christian values for your children.
As partners in your child's faith formation let us work together to reecho the love and Word of God to the children of this generation and this parish.
Sacramental Preparation Programs
Saint Rose of Lima provides sacramental preparation programs for Eucharist, Reconciliation, and High School Confirmation that are parish based.
This is an opportunity for both the student and family to renew and deepen their understanding of these primary Sacraments.
Parents play a very important role and should provide follow-up from the class session.
Parent packs are sent home, providing the opportunity for dialog and interaction with your child during this most important time of preparations.
PARENTS MUST ATTEND ALL SACRAMENTAL PREPARATION MEETINGS.
A minimum of two years preparation is required for the reception of the Sacraments of Reconciliation and Eucharist and High School Confirmation.
Students must meet the requirements of the program and participate in the celebration of Eucharist each week.
Education and Sacramental Preparation for Developmentally Disabled and Hearing Impaired
Saint Rose of Lima is blessed to host two programs especially designed to educate persons with developmental disabilities and hearing impairment.
If you wish to enroll someone in either of these programs, simply call the Office for Religious Education at (619) 426-6717 or register on-line.
High School Confirmation Program
Our parish High School Confirmation Program attempts to work with a student's schedule.
This two year program ideally begins in 9th grade and through spring in 10th grade.
However, some students may begin at a later date.
Students are expected to attend the required religion classes held throughout the regular academic year, a Confirmation Retreat, Monthly Youth Rallies, and regular Sunday Masses.
Students in Catholic High School (Mater Dei, Saints, OLP, Cathedral) attend religion classes every day and are therefore required to attend the following: Two four-week courses on (1) Stewardship and (2) Justice & Peace, Confirmation Retreat, Monthly Youth Rallies, and regular Sunday Masses.
Note: Students wishing to combine their classes on Stewardship and Justice & Peace may do so by attending a retreat on these subjects which is offered by the Office for Religious Education in the winter.
Register for High School Confirmation Today!
Middle School Program
Students in grades 7 and 8, meet the 1st & 2nd Wednesday of each month to look closely at their call to relationship with Jesus Christ, His Church and our world today.
A variety of activities provide the students with religious education and social outreach opportunities.
Pre-school Program
St. Rose of Lima offers a religious education program for 4 and 5 year-old children on Sunday mornings at 10:00 a.m. Children are encouraged to discover and explore the wonders of God around them, in themselves, their families and in the special gift of Jesus.
Children's Liturgy of the Word
This vital program is designed for children of elementary school age.
Children are dismissed after the opening prayer and gather to hear the weekly readings from the Children's Lectionary.
Age appropriate discussion regarding the readings and an opportunity for prayer is the format used during the Children's Liturgy of the Word.
Children rejoin their parents during the offertory of the Mass.
Feaster School
Age appropriate classes plus preparation for the sacraments of Reconciliation and Eucharist are provided for the children of Feaster Edison School.
Classes are held each Tuesday at 3:00 p.m. at the school.
Attendance Concerns and questions about attendance should be shared with the Director of Religious Education Sister Pat Weldon at 426-6717.
Parents who have children who are ill and unable to attend class are asked to call the Religious Education Office, so that information may be given to your child's catechist.Children need to be picked up at the dismissal time, as supervision is not provided in our church parking lot for children waiting for rides.