Religious Life
Our religious philosophy at Episcopal Day School is to be a Christian School that seeks both to nurture our Christian students in their faith and nurture the spiritual and moral lives of our students of all faiths and traditions.
We welcome students of all denominational and faith backgrounds at EDS and present the Christian Faith in a way that is respectful to children of all backgrounds.
We believe that our school's diversity is our strength.
Chapel preaching is drawn from the stories and teachings of the Bible and challenges our students to reflect both spiritually and morally on their lives and seeks to nurture their personal development.
Our religious curriculum is aimed at graduating biblically literate students who have an excellent understanding of the Bible's meaning to the Christian Faith and its importance to Western Civilization.
As a Christian School, community service is essential to our life, and we undertake many projects each year both at the school and grade level.
We also require our middle school students to complete fifteen hours of service to those in need each year through our Beyond EDS Program.
Lastly, we seek to be a community where all of our students are known, loved, supported, and encouraged.
Our school chaplain, with the help of the whole EDS faculty, provides pastoral care to all of our students and families.
The following excerpt from "The Idea of an Episcopal School" captures our identity as a Christian School in the Episcopal Tradition:
What is an Episcopal school?
Episcopalians, like all Christians, believe that our life is founded on the life of Jesus, and that as a Church, we are called to offer the redeeming love of God to all people.
Episcopal schools are concrete expressions of the Church's care for young people and their families, and of the belief that God calls us to love all of God's children.
An Episcopal school is comprehensive and inclusive
The Episcopal Church encourages respect for the other person's beliefs.
Therefore, an Episcopal school should not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, or national origin, and should actively seek out faculty and students of diverse backgrounds and traditions.
We do so in the belief that they bring something to be valued and respected, and because we wish to be broadly inclusive of the community we serve.
An Episcopal school looks for values that unite people rather than those that divide.
The unity of an Episcopal school is based on rite and tradition
In an Episcopal school there likely will be no list of rules that define who we must be as a community.
Every member of the community should be able to join in celebrating the life of the community in some ritual way (formal or informal), as it embodies a sacramental principle dear to us: God makes sacred the things of this world as they are offered to God in worship.
An Episcopal school values reason as a way to true understanding
In the Episcopal tradition, learning is important not to find the right answers to be used against others, but in order to arrive at God's truth.
An Episcopal education will raise issues of meaning, identity, and ultimate truth at every opportunity in all parts of its program, but will also acknowledge the limits of human reason.
An Episcopal school has a concern for the well being of society
An Episcopal school will help children understand that they do not exist apart from society, that society's issues are their issues, and that they are called upon to respond to the needs of others.
An Episcopal school is founded on love
Love for students, for their value as children of God, for their unique gifts, must be the foundation of all we do.
We must act out of love, teach love, model love, and love one another in our community above all else.
Without this love, all else is meaningless.
I am convinced that nowhere else could our children receive the same high quality of education, not only academically, but spiritually, emotionally, and physically.