If faith educators want to invite families to undertake tuition in their programs, I put to you that there are many many many ways in which this can be offered.
What "faith instructors" want is the power conveyed by the state to create a situation where the children come to them as part of an activity they are compelled to do.
We are sick and tired of being told by "faith instructors" and their enablers, that there are no issues, or "lets not throw the baby out with the bath water".
The baby in the bath is the loud complaining of "faith instructors" who are scared to death that without the schools giving them a half hour that their enrollments will shrink.
Lastly, the evidence, some of which is linked on our site, shows that good multi faith education is helpful to understanding and tolerance in a pluralist society, and this is overwhelmingly what "parents" and "teachers" want - the only one who wants differently it seems are "faith instructors" and other avowed sectarian interests.
Families are perfectly capable of choosing and engaging in religion - the Minister of Education should not negotiate with "faith instructors" in order to introduce sectarian programs in the schools - this is exactly what is happening here, and raising the concerns of organizations in the business of doing "faith instruction" above the interests of teachers and families is a violation of the basic rights of citizens in a society based on the idea of religious toleration and freedom.
FIRIS would like to offer the idea that "secular" education is the foundation - and lifeblood of this nation.
ACCESS is clearly hostile to the core values of Australian society - shame on you ACCESS for thinking you could run over parents like this!!
My children attend a state school in Melbourne's leafy outer east... Evonne Paddison may be shocked to know there is a "small, secularist group" alive and kicking here too, even though we are not "inner-urban".
I continue to feel incredulous that children at a secular school should have to opt OUT of religious education, and hope that eventually this system will change.
Our school's provider is Access Ministries, and during the past week I have been appalled by their attempts to gain further influence in our secular school, this time via the government's National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program (NSCSWP).
Ms Carr assured us that would not happen, and said proselytising and evangelism are prohibited under the program guidelines.
She said that while ACCESS Ministries Chaplains were drawn to chaplaincy roles because of their Christian faith and values, their intention was not to push their personal religious beliefs onto other people, but to offer a variety of support services that would improve student wellbeing and meet the diverse range of needs within the school community.
When asked about other possible providers for the role, Ms Carr informed us that all the providers on the list were Christian organisations.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.
But wait, there's more... Ms Carr had handed us brochures at the start of her presentation, which we didn't have a chance to read until we went home.
The brochures read, "Victoria's young people need to know God cares for them no matter who they are or what they have done... Young Victorians need Christian school chaplains from ACCESS Ministries.
Every day of the school year, ACCESS Ministries chaplains are sharing God's love with young Victorians."
Towards the end of the publication there is a photo of the (now infamous) Evonne Paddison, together with a list of her credentials, and a description of her demeanor - "There's a passion for life at work here... It's in the way she's as comfortable lobbying for chaplaincy at Parliament as she is using 'Jerry the Puppet' to enthrall a tiny Prep student."
The brochure also includes ACCESS Ministries 'vision' for the future.
It states, "Our vision is to transform a nation... it means steering ACCESS Ministries through a phase of intense growth... and ultimately it means reaching every school student in Victoria.
I wish ACCESS Ministries were on trial, and I hope one day they (and Jerry the Puppet) will be barred from spreadin' the love at state schools.
This is a staggeringly shallow question, with an obvious answer, "no".
When a child is bullied we don't ask, well did it really hurt that much, before we judge bullying to be wrong - and even though ACCESS and its volunteers are incompetent, this doesn't excuse what they are doing, or make it "OK".
Would it be OK if the town sent someone to Godless Gross's house to say the grace?
Would you appreciate it the town just sent over someone from the church to offer to say grace, and asked you to sign a form before you sat down to your meal indicating your interest in the volunteer saying grace at your dinner table (it would only be right at the beginning and said softly) - I mean since when "harm" become a determining factory for the basic right to privacy in matters of religion?
Additionally, working with allies in the Department of Education, the way parents are informed about this program is designed to downplay the things that any normal person would find troubling - and to emphasize things that everyone thinks is useful.
Richards did make the argument that SRI has been and is promoted as "something that is good for you even if you are not religious", because it contains many things and ideas that have "secular value", to do this she simply read from the information given to parents about "The agreed Christian syllabus called "Religion in Life".
builds on the VELS as they relate to the physical, personal and social learning strand
introduces children to the religious life and ideas of their community
MULTI-faith primary schools are forced to hold Christian religious classes, even if the school doesn't want them, the Herald Sun can reveal.
Victorian law says schools are powerless to stop an accredited religious instructor holding classes during the school day.
Parents might choose not to have their children attend, but the school council and school principal must offer classes if approached by an approved provider, an Education Department spokeswoman said.
It says the school council does not have the authority to decide whether the program takes place.
Cathy Wever, mother of a grade 1 pupil, said the classes forced parents to lay out our religious beliefs in public by asking children to opt in or opt out.
"This is a very multi-faith school, and we do not want to divide children on the basis of religion," she said.
Debra Dalidakis said her family was Jewish and chose Ormond Primary because there were no religious instruction classes.
Just when you thought ACCESS, CEO Evonne Paddison, had the last word, sneering that FIRIS was an "inner urban Melbourne" ... you know, thing, a parent from outer Bendigo, Strathfieldsaye VIC 3551 - took time out from the sheep dip, to send in this photo of a ute sporting a FIRIS sticker parked far from the city lights, and right in front of her kid's school.
I came across your interesting website by chance and thought I'd drop a note to let you know of some research we've been involved with in the UK to do with religious education and opt-outs.