Just in from largess of our fantastic sponsors - FIRIS bumper stickers designed by our own Mum and Dad powered design studio.
Not many people are aware of this-particularly School Principals and supporting churches who just think Access is the same as CCES.
One concern was about the story of Jesus turning water into wine,presented as an example of Jesus caring for his friends-by giving them alcohol-this was for grade 1 and 2, with the teacher notes suggesting you could say if you were at a party and the wine ran out people might go home !
It is quite frightening that this organization is the main provider of Special religious education in Victoria and the only accredited provider of Christian religious education with a theological position that is fundamental.
I believe there should be a religious studies programme in State schools teaching about many of the world religions and taught by trained teachers as I do believe it is very important to learn about the religious beliefs and traditions in order to encourage and nurture understanding , tolerance and delight in the diversity.
All the main religions share the basic Golden Rule-do unto others what you would have them do to you or expressed as don't do to another that which you would not like done to you.
I do believe that such a programme could be begun in Grade 1 with learning about the different festivals, progressing to stories from sacred texts and history of the different faiths.
I am pleased to be able to inform you that not only were we completely exonerated by the Federal Government of any charges of proselytising but also we received official confirmation in December from the State Minister of Education, Martin Dixon, that the State Government's investigation over a three month period has found no case to answer.
Furthermore, Mary Bluett has said that 6 hours of training is "totally inadequate" - by "commending" ACCESS The Minister is saying that he really doesn't care what teachers in Victoria have to say - therefore, it is "Screw You, AEU".
The whole thing makes it sound like it is not only endorsed, but advocated and approved by the Minister for Education, and that it makes your teeth whiter too.
It is the official policy of the school and if you DON"T want to participate, you must still say "NO".
As you can see this school has done nothing to advise parents what will be done if they don't sign up - and the form is designed as a permission slip, like any excursion form, "Please indicate your permission for Johnny to go on the class trip to the Zoo".
So the typical parent will say, yes, just because they say yes to every permission form for every "incursion" - and also because parents trust the schools - if the school says "this is all approved by the minister of education", who would question that?
The last thing ACCESS wants is to have this program put out of the curriculum and to ask parents if they really want their kids to attend voluntarily, without the Minister of Education running as their spokesman for quality - this is a clear cut case of using the authority of the government to promote a religious program.
Not long before the inquiry in VCAT in March - Longstaff and his new ethics teaching organization, who agreed to teach ethics with volunteers because ... well no one is really sure why state school teachers can't teach ethics, and no one is really sure why the Church sets the terms of reference in the nation's schools ... oh, wait, I do know why ... they set the terms because they have access to politicians who hold hearings like this ...