Classes are offered concurrent with both worship services as listed.
Please be considerate of our teachers and pick up your child promptly at the end of the service.
Middle School and High School youth will be free to leave class on their own at the conclusion of their morning program.
Any program holidays will be announced in the newsletter and the Order of Service announcements.
Registration: All families of the church are asked to complete a registration form annually.
These forms give permission for your child to participate in the program and provide valuable information which allow us to best meet the needs of your child, whether it be particular medical concerns or allergies, special programs in which your child wishes to participate, or special mailings.
There is no registration fee; however a vital religious education program depends on your support financially as well as with your time and talents.
Visitors: We welcome Visitors.
Please introduce yourself and your child to the staff and group leaders, and complete a visitor form.
Teachers: We consider faith development to be a lifelong learning process, and who better to guide our youngsters than the adult members and friends of the church.
Our teachers are dedicated and creative volunteers who maintain the best interests of the children in their classrooms.
The teachers can best minister to the needs of the children in their class when they are kept informed of each child's particular needs and concerns.
We encourage you, the parent, to become acquainted with the teachers in your child's class.
Volunteers: Our program is a cooperative one, taught and led by volunteers.
As a parent or guardian, your active participation in our ministry to children and youth is expected.
Please consider what our Religious Education Program means to you and your family, and what you can do to actively support our programming, whether through teaching, committee or event participation, or other opportunities listed on the registration form.
RE Committee members and staff will be available to discuss this with you.
Snacks: Classes for our youngest children serve snacks provided by the church.
During Social Hour, we also host a Kids Corner with snacks and child-friendly activities in the Social Hall.
Please consider hosting or contributing to our morning fellowship opportunity for children .
Behavioral Expectations: We strive to make our program a lively, interactive learning environment with a focus on care and respect.
Each class formulates guidelines for behavior during the first few classes, and violations are few.
However, should behavior come into issue, gentle redirection or time away from the group may be needed.
Parents are expected to supervise their own children unless in a class or signed into childcare.
Encourage your child to show respect for our community and behave appropriately in church.
If concerns arise, please contact your child's teacher, or the DRE.
If your child has allergies, medical conditions, or other special needs, please be sure to inform the teaches and DRE and complete the requested forms so we can work with you to best meet your child's needs.
Tips to Make RE More Fun!
Attend regularly.
Consistent attendance allows your child the opportunity to develop friendships, become better acquainted with the teachers, and develop continuity and increased understanding of the material.
Parents who possess an attitude of cheerful expectancy about weekly church attendance have less difficulty keeping children involved.
Dress for active participation.
Our classes are creative, active places with glue, paint, games, etc.
Familiarize yourself with the regular activities of the program.
Talk with your child and the teachers about the activities in the class.
Keep informed through the newsletter, and participate in intergenerational events together.
Share your own religious beliefs with your children.
We encourage you to learn along with your child as you take a spiritual journey together.
Support and encourage your child, wherever he/she is on the religious journey.
Recognize that your child's religious needs may differ from your own.
Many children have a need for ritual, structure, and definitive answers to difficult questions.
Seek out the answers and support you need.
Although you are your children's primary religious educator, you are not alone!
Share some of your time and talents.
Parental involvement is a key ingredient to the success of our program, and reinforces the importance of church in your child's mind.
When you are connected and having fun, so will your child.
Always feel free to call the teacher, DRE, minister, or committee member with your questions, comments, or concerns.
Religious Education Committee (REC)
The REC is the body which works in conjunction with the Director of Religious Education (DRE) to oversee the Religious Education program.
The committee consists of a core steering committee, and a number of program related teams.
We welcome your input, feedback, and participation.
Committee meetings are held monthly.
Parents and other church members are invited to attend.