Well this is one reason: ACCESS is a political lobby who have lobbied to put religion in the schools by statute and regulation.
No one can really believe this is happening.
It is happening and we're beyond the moment where anyone denies it and into the phase where everyone hopes the issue just goes away.
This is even making grandmothers in England angry:
I am relieved to see there is a growing voice for those who seek an end to the indoctrination of young children in Victoria's schools.
Last year I spent 3 months with my grandchildren in Victoria ( I do not live in Australia) around Easter time I was alarmed to hear my eldest grandchild taking about the Easter story in such a way as made clear she had been indoctrinated by "teacher" at her school.
When I found that the person teaching the "religious instruction" class was in fact a volunteer evangelizing to a captive and impressionable group of 7 year olds I was incensed.
I still cannot believe such blatant brain washing is allowed to take place in Australian Schools.
Despite the fact that I am a Christian I see no place for these self-serving bigots in the education of your young people.
Quite aside from the ethical and equality issues I am also worried about the type of people this exposes the children too.
What checks would have taken place to into their background?
Some poor kids, from homes with other religious beliefs or with no set beliefs, may already have suffered psychological damage because of this policy.
I wish you every success in you just fight against the ill thought out and applied policy.
Sincerely Mrs. Middleton
Seems like ACCESS Ministry has a new gang to worry about ... as if they didn't already have their hands full.
Author and Ethicist Leslie Cannold, attends a dinner of the Humanist Society, and delivers an insightful and inspirational charge to them.
The whole thing is a "must read" for anyone following this issue.
One of the many good points Cannold makes is that: Atheism, Humanism and Rationalism are not Secularism, a point that FIRIS parents are at pains for everyone to understand.
It is clear that ACCESS Ministry wants to be attacked by people who are "against religion".
Parents simply want the right to form their children's religious identity without the help of parachurch missions which raid the Government and come up with insane and deeply misleading policy to impose on everyone.
May vs. Must.
Opt out rather than Opt in.
Non Compulsory activities located in the middle of a compulsory school day.
Religion parading as "values".
Instruction by untrained volunteers recruited to perform ministry, masquerading as "education".
Cannold finds that Australia's ideas about how to run a "secular school system" make about as much sense as the woman who thinks she is just a "little bit pregnant".
Describing RI volunteer run classes and chaplains in schools as "the Australian experiment" which had been "a miserable failure", Dr. Leslie Cannold has called for a united push to kick religions out of schools.
Dr. Cannold described exploitation of Australia's acceptance of religious freedom as pushing "violently intolerant ideologies", as she accepted the Australian Humanist of the year award last night.
Michael Bachelard reports © The Age today:
Yesterday saw the full fledged assault by Australian Christian Lobby's apparatchik, Rob Ward on the lawsuit brought against the unfair SRI policy.
The piece showed clearly that ANYONE who questions what is going on is a target.
So, added to the list of things that Jim Wallace doesn't like, are now Anglican Priests with some concern for faith (you listening Scott Stephens?)
This has become known as "the Battle for Bouma".
It isn't clear if the ACL intends to capture Bouma alive or just mow him down and dump his body at sea.
Ward seems to indicate that Bouma is a traitor and is now just another "militant secular humanist" (what ever that means).
But Evangelical on line magazine, Eternity is claiming that Bouma was misquoted by the AGE.
"When the Education Acts were introduced in the 1880s, they embraced three great principles that lie at the core of the objective to bring education to children across Australia: education would be free, education would be compulsory, and education would be secular ," Mr Kirby said.
"In recent years, there has been a decline in respect for secularism.
This is seen in opposition expressed to providing secular ethics in public schools as more school children elect not to attend religious scripture in schools.
At present, they are subject to child minding rather than broadening their minds to address ethical questions they will face as citizens.
There has also been a huge increase in funding by successive federal governments to place chaplains in public schools.
"Secularism protects people of religion and people of no religion.
The latter should not feel uncomfortable or out of place in a public school.
They should not feel guilty about not adhering to a religion.
In fact, secularism was one of the great constitutional gifts of the English to the world.
"The alternative is commonly religious intolerance and rejection of contrary beliefs.
" I believe we should return to the tradition of secularism in Australian society, particularly in Australia's public schools ," Mr Kirby concludes.
Following Martin Dixons announcement of a further grant of $220,000 to ACCESS Ministries, in early April community concerns relating to the ACCESS monopoly were discussed on The Drum .
An "issue which has been simmering for quite some time" according to ABC Religion and Ethics editor Scott Stephens.
Unlike NSW Scott notes that ethics classes are not available.
As Tim Palmer prompts, "They have to pick a religion or nothing".
With 96% of classes provided by ACCESS that choice is clearly made by default.
Describing Victorias legislation as "remarkable" in that it "guarantees secular, compulsory and free schooling", Scott Stephens leads an interesting discussion.
As many of us know, with funding comes pressure to spend - or more importantly - be seen to be spending.
Stephens thus refers to Scott Hedges article and his comparison to the over funded insulation scheme, "effectively installing faulty religious products in our children's minds".
John Roskam and Fran Kelly raise sweeping secularisation and human rights respectively.
Tim Palmer hosts a discussion with ABC Radio National Breakfast host Fran Kelly, ABC Religion and Ethics editor Scott Stephens and John Roskam from the Institute of Public Affairs.
It is always painful to see Catholics fulminate about life in a secular society.
This comment, left on the AGE Education Resource Center, manages to get just about every lame and illogical argument into one dense screed, so it is worth dismantling piece by piece.
The reason I say it is so annoying is that it seems to come from a Catholic writer educated at a Catholic University.
Australia did more to give Catholics a fair go than almost any other place in the WORLD.
How ungrateful is it for a Catholic to say that growing up in SA made them feel "discriminated against" ... it is almost an insane thing to say.
Of all the states, South Australia was most strongly committed to "religious freedom", which of course meant that religion was something for the church and its members to do, not for the government to manage.
Much of this was done FOR the Catholics!!
Re: Religious education in government schools
I think the teaching of Jesus have foundationally shaped Western civilisation in a profound and enduring manner.
I fully support the rights of children to learn about Jesus.
As someone who was denied CRE in the SA school system, I felt robbed and discriminated against.
I doubt whether in Saudi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, and other majority Muslim nations that they are having a debate about whether Islam should be taught to children.
I totally support their right to teach their children about the faith that has influenced and shaped their societies.
Equally, since the teachings of Jesus have shaped and influenced Australia, children have the right to learn about that.
This whole campaign run by The Age is one verging on religious vilification and utterly intolerant.
It has been a systematic smearing of a reputable and ethical organisation such as Access Ministries.
Nicholas, 2 May 2011, Tertiary - Australian Catholic University
I'd like to invite our readers to pick a line or idea in this and respond to it below ... by doing this we can pretty much deal with 90% of the arguments that seem to keep coming no matter how illogical or absurd.
Thanks for your feedback ... we will be calling up ACU to see who is in charge of teaching both Catholic history in Australia, and logic.
The upcoming complaint to the Victorian Equal Opportunity and Human Rights Commission is referenced today in The Age Education Resource Centre .
Colleen Ricci of The Age has summarised the major points surrounding the controversy of Religious Instruction, presented as Religious Education by ACCESS Ministries.
Areas covered include, © The Age:
Under current arrangements, if a school is approached by an accredited teacher of religious studies, it is obliged to allow 30 minutes a week of ''special religious instruction'' (SRI) to its pupils.
Children automatically attend these classes unless parents formally ''opt out''.
The complainants say the Education Department segregates children on religious grounds and discriminates by making it incumbent upon families to ''opt out'' of a program, rather than ''opt in'', and by not providing a secular (non-religious) alternative for students.
They also challenge the prevailing interpretation of the legislation, which says special religious instruction ''may be given''.
The department interprets this to mean ''must be given''.
This, it says, is to conform to the ''original intent'' of the act.
Who teaches religion in Victorian state schools?
According to Access Ministries' chief executive Evonne Paddison, volunteers are carefully trained to follow these requirements.
What are some concerns?
Some parents, social commentators, academics and spiritual leaders worry that children are given a predominantly Christian perspective without reference to others.
They also point to accounts of proselytising, and reports of children who have opted out of programs being inadequately supervised or given no ''appropriate alternative''.
He says all faiths should be offered equally. ''
So if there are three Baha'i people who want it in school X, then they should be able to get it,'' he says.
Other religions have complained of a ''Christian bias'' in Victorian religious education and funding.
What do others say?
Despite the controversy, Education Minister Martin Dixon says there are no plans to review the system.
Supporters of the Access Ministries program say it has been unfairly criticised, and that for many pupils the program is the only introduction to Christianity and its values.
Some maintain that religious instruction has no place in a secular state school, while others argue that our multifaith community demands a broad religious literacy to encourage tolerance.
The solution is not to abandon education about religion; events of the past decade illustrate the dangers of religious ignorance and intolerance.
However, the government should not rely on faith-driven volunteers instead of trained educators who teach to the same professional standards as in any other subject.
The goal must not be to convert children but to ensure they have the general religious literacy they need to make sense of the past, present and future.''
''Every day of the school year, Access Ministries CRE teachers and chaplains are sharing God's love with over 200,000 young Victorians.
[ACCESS Ministries]
''[Would] the providers of Christian education feel equally comfortable if the religious education spot were handed over instead to Jewish teachers, or Buddhist teachers or, shock horror, Muslim teachers?
If they're not comfortable in that, then it's clear that there's a bias in the teaching.''
''Recent letters have offered evidence of strangely unorthodox opinions being presented to children, which are decidedly unacceptable to liberally minded parents who belong to mainstream Christian denominations or none at all.
Parents need to be able to judge whether or not to permit their children to receive lessons after they are notified as to the qualifications and theological stance of the instructor who is timetabled for their child.
Your View.
Should religious instruction be provided to Victorian state primary schools?
Why or why not?
If so, how should it be taught?
What are the alternatives?
An opportunity to comment is available, by clicking here , and scrolling to the bottom.
Comments are moderated and take time to appear, be patient and tell your friends!
UPDATE: the turn out from the CAMPAIGN was fantastic ... over 50 really thoughtful and respectful comments so far!
ACCESS Ministry and the Victoria Department of Education are running one of the most embarrassing kinds of religious teaching in the Western World.
At a time when most civilizations are divesting themselves from explicit denominational religious instruction in favor of comparative religion, Australia is building up the capacity of "ParaChurches", like ACCESS to keep cartoon religion taught by well meaning volunteers, many of them with impairments of one kind or another, but all selected for their "devotion to faith" rather than their qualifications as teachers.
Officially, both the department and the Ministry claim that "Special Religious Instruction" is about "values", and they advertise what they are doing with phrases like:
"Explore personal values and choices", "Discuss Christian beliefs and faith", "Learn to value and respect all cultures and beliefs", "Discuss life experiences and key events", "Understand everyday biblical references".
This is a letter highlighting what goes on in a CRE class in Victoria, by a volunteer - remember, this is in a public school, it is sanctioned by the Government, but here is how the Ministry talks about it when they aren't trying to conceal their real motives:
The Honourable Michael Kirby, AC CMG and former Australian High Court judge, will appeal for the traditional place of secularism in Australian public schools, and the protection it offers children who have no religion as well as those who are members of a religion.
Furthemore, it is 'dog-whistling' in order to increase intolerance toward those of Christian faith.
If such a campaign were run against any other group, faith, or race, it would be rightly condemned.
I urge that this unfair and biased campaign against be stopped.