''There is a very close relationship between the ALP and the Catholic Church which should never be discounted,'' he said
Surely putting kids of all backgrounds in a class together and discussing ethics can only be a good thing - certainly more productive I would have thought than segregating them by their parents belief and .... what was it that Rev Gordon Cheng said....
The thing that makes me REALLY ANGRY is that people who wish to indoctrinate the young to believe in their imaginary friend (what happened to separation of Church and State??)
Surely the way to handle this (if our governments didn't live in fear of the religious lobby groups) would be to agree on which subject would offer the most value to children in terms of their ability to function in society (ethics would be an excellent choice in my view), and make it optional.
As somebody mentioned above, the school curriculum is already chock-full of 'stuff' some bureaucrat, driven by political ideology, believes should be taught in public schools.
Instead, there should be a course that caters to the needs of all students, regardless of cultural background, enabling them to eventually choose for themselves what spiritual values to hold.
To promote and encourage spiritual/psychological wellbeing in families, relationships and society, the most appropriate path would be to offer a course in philosophy, in which all major religions are discussed and compared, along with the teachings and ideas of great thinkers who worked outside established religions.
As a part time teacher and being in the middle of writing a script for the end of year play, I asked the scripture teacher if she minded if I kept working during her lesson.
Later I asked my daughter whether the thought of Hell worried her, and told her she needn't attend scripture if she didn't want to.
My daughter goes to a NSW Public Primary School and in a school note her principal wrote " I have received a number of requests for students to withdraw from scripture classes.Scripture is part of the school program and students will only be exempted on religious grounds."
Seems to me the opposite end of two ideas.
Why "General Religion" Seems to me education in reality and ethics would suit just fine.
When I was a kid in the 60's in a Victorian country town I was one of the few catholics going to the local state school.
Religious instruction was protestant so I was exempted and got to sit in the library reading.
Probably the most useful hour of the whole week.
I was appalled to read this article and discover that not much had changed.
No need for a special class.
26th September 2009, 11:42 AM
What on earth is "general religion'?
Why do people think you have to have a religion?
I imagine it is what is sometimes called comparative religion.
Knowing there are lots of religions all of whose adherents are passionate that theirs is the one true one is a useful thing I think.
26th September 2009, 01:31 PM
Hmmm, from previous experience, I would guess that any exposure to ethics under the 'general religion' guise would be xtian based and therefore not acceptable to a wide section of Australian society.
If you mean the thing Howard bought in about chaplains they did't have to be a christian pastor and there were rules about not proselytising for a particular religion.
However, at the 1996 Annual General Meeting, members of the Centre resolved to amend the constitution to reflect a less formal relationship with the parish, thus re-enforcing the Ethics Centre's commitment to independence and its openness to those of any or no religious faith.
We view the existing education policy as socially unjust and urge the Minister to amend it.
While the hunt for 'terrorists' lurches on, nobody has noticed the stupid bombs we're seemingly bombarded with every day.
And I bet this reverend is wondering why we think that his religion is evil...