Wayne Taylor Human rights?
Homosexuality, gay marriages, evolution, are all matter of fact in our world.
I don't necessarily agree with Pythegoreon's theory.
Darin I believe that all kids at a certain age should have sex education classes, but homosexuality and especially religion should not be discussed in the classroom.
Discussions of homosexuality should only be handled by the parents because not everyone has the same levels of tolerance or acceptance of the same sex lifestyle.
Kiefer I didn't know that there even was objection to teaching evolution and sex ed in public schools anymore.
If your religious or moral "values" can not coexist with modern science and basic sexual information, then you need to rethink them.
The question is, do you want them to learn in an open environment with moderated discussions, or would you rather have them talk to a psychiatrist or parole officer later in life?
The World needs more critical thinkers, not a return to the Salem Witch Trials.
If this legislation passes, I would not hold it against any teacher that says to hell with it and quits.
Lindsay RE: Dennis
Your comment was completely unnecessary; I will have you know that Catholic schools do not teach intolerance and most teach both creation and evolution in separate areas of the curriculum.
Children are still required to learn about science and humanity as well as embracing their faith.
High schools still offer Biology to students who wish to pursue it, along with Chemistry and Physics, while still maintaining the mandatory Religious Studies classes.
Do some research before you open your mouth.
Don Bill 44 really sucks.
It is not necessary.
Just because an idea is taught, it does not mean it needs to be adopted.
Parents should help a kid deal with theories, not restrict their learning.
This bill makes human rights too complicated and will turn into a huge bureaucracy.
If a parent doesn't like what is being taught, arrange something with the teacher.
Keep it simple so that the needs of individuals and families can be responded to.
We should try and minimize rducation being devisive.
MB Owler Hey, Dennis....I WENT to a Catholic school.
I learned about evolution, world religions, psychology, sociology and philosophy.
The only thing I regret is that I was forced to take sex education at school.
Frankly, I would have preferred to have that information from my mother, rather than a roomful of giggling peers.
I also have a pretty decent knowledge of the Bible, and with a bit of effort on my part--commonly called "common sense" or "adherence to the Golden Rule"--I can get along with most people regardless of their beliefs.
By the way, as a "small c" catholic, I've also experienced more than my fair share of intolerance from various religious and non-religious groups.
Including atheists AND fundamentalist christians.
So where the heck did you get YOUR intolerant perspective from?
The Alberta curriculum is unbelievably easy to access and read through; check out whatever the school is teaching, and if you don't like it (or think you could do it better), then teach your kids yourself.
Catering to each individual parent's wishes/beliefs/ignorances would be a ridiculous nightmare.
Give me a break!
Jen Wow, I thought children were supossed to get an education.
One where various religions, sexuality or sexual orientations are explained with facts.
Nothing breeds misunderstanding and discrimination more than people who simply are not educated on differences between people and religions.
It feels like government is working backwards against peoples rights.
The right to be treated fairly begins with an education to children and society about our differences.
Let's celebrate our differences and not be ingnorant of them.
Marie I believe the school act covers what is needed.
Susanne On the contary Dennis, Catholic School system has been wonderful for our family.
Discussions and teaching of religion in a classroom very clearly violates the rights of people who want to raise their children free from religious influence.
Bob Kids will learn things, whether you want them to or not.
Tolerance is taught ten fold there, not sure where you are getting your information from.
As far as evolution, this subject is also covered.
Perhaps we all need to learn some "tolerance" and start being a bit more open minded to everyone's teachings??
M. in Calgary Tolerance has nothing to do with it.
There is no reason to protect anyone from religious curriculum.
However human rights should not need to be enshrined they should be a given without having to write it out or make into law.
As far as sensitive issues these have no place being part of the curriculum or discussion in schools.
Why would anyone object to religious teaching when it seems common place to teach the theory of evolution, which has no scientific evidence at all to support it?
Regardless parents should always have the right to protect their children from anything that they are subjected to.
Calgary Guy Dennis: comments like yours are hilariously hypocritical.
Speaking of tolerance and then making an offhanded insult to an entire faith shows how intolerant you are yourself.
If you actually cared about the truth instead of your own agenda you may realize that any Catholic school I've seen tries to promote acceptance and unity, even to people who don't share the same beliefs.
Seems a lot more tolerant than you.
Trish S. I think this legislation is going to be welcomed by a lot of people, and not for the good of the children, either.
It will allow the enforcement of and control of narrowmindedness, when children should be exposed to different ways of thinking.
What better place than the schools to help children explore ideas other than those taught by parents?
Leave the public system alone Why don't parents who have concerns about the secular public school curriculum on contentious topics simply send their kids to the religious school alternative of their choice?
These educational facilities are unlikely to cover the contentious topics and if they do will be "toeing the line" of the particular religious group during the discussion.
Problem solved without interfering with very student and teacher in the province.
Dennis If you don't want your kid to learn about evolution or tolerance, send them to a catholic school.
If passed, Bill 44 will allow parents to pull their kids from classroom discussions about religion, sexuality or sexual orientation.
Updated: Mon May.
04 2009 18:52:22
Amendments to Bill 44 has many components but the most contentious change focuses on allowing parents to pull their kids from classroom discussions about religion, sexuality or sexual orientation.
Some question why this clause needs to be in human rights legislation when it should be covered by the School Act.
"We are doing nobody any favours by dragging the Human Rights Commission into disputes between parents and the schools," says Janet Keeping, the president of the Sheldon Chumir Foundation.
The School Act currently allows parents to withdraw their child from a religious curriculum but does not cover sex education.
The minister responsible for Bill 44, Lindsay Blackett, says the parental opt-out clause was created after he received suggestions from a number of people including constituents and members of caucus.
Educators worry that a code of silence could be the unintended result of the changes.
"If teachers are worried about suffering some negative consequence from talking about these subjects then the easiest thing would be to not talk about them at all.
And that would be a loss not just for the students who were taken out of the discussions but for every student," says Sinclair MacRae from Mount Royal College.
Some parents CTV News spoke to say they like the idea of having another authority to take their concerns to.
"I think it's nice to have the power to say 'I'd like to do that in the home, I'd like to discuss religion or homosexuality in the home,'" says one parent.
Bill 44 goes to second reading on Tuesday.
Comments are now closed for this story
YD What is the point of a curriculum if some part of it are optional ?
If I follow the teaching of Pythagoreanism (a religion which actually predate Christianity), can I pull my kids out of classes where the teacher is going to mention irrational numbers ?
Kristen Catholic schools still have to teach evolution, it is part of Alberta curriculum.
The story talked about how parents do not have the right to remove their child from sex education but this is not the case.
Every class that I ever went to about Sex ed, my parents had to sign a permission form in order for me to attend the class.
If the form wasn't signed, the child was not permitted to learn about sexuality.
The same thing goes for any classes with religious content (with the exception of the Religion program in the Catholic system) This legislation is pointless because parents already have all these rights, many are simply not aware of it.
ok Dennis Dennis: How much do you know about Catholic school??
Ignorance is bliss, I suppose.
Paul b I don';t think the parent should have the choice as to what their children learn.
If they don't like what is being taugh in Public or Catholic schools then maybe Teach your child yourself.
If you pull a child from almost anything, then your child will never develope into a critical thinking adult who will be able to handle what life will throw at them.
If the child doesn't learn about it in a controlled, un-biased environment about sensitive topic such as sexuality, sexual orientation, etc. the parent is only teaching the child intolerence towards these groups.
Maybe here is the problem that discrinimation faces...
Bob Isn't Dennis' comment akin to a hate crime?!
My, my, what an impossible situation we have created in which personal rights utterly trump social responsibility.
why stop here.
why dont we include all subjects as options... we should all get a order form so can pick and choose the subjects we want our children to have.
like an order form from a chinese restauraunt.
Kim Catholic schools actually teach about tolerance and evolution.
Both topics are covered in religion classes.
Mike What Dennis said
PCa Calgary Children are a gift from God to the parents; they are not a gift from God to the government or from God to the teachers.
As a parent I have a right and duty to intervene if a teacher wants to advocate immoral or atheistic views and try to indoctrinate my child.
Having said that, there is no point in duplicating the same provisions in two statutes or (worse yet) having two statutes that say different things.
Robert from Alberta Just more gay bashing from the Alberta Conservatives.
Parents don't concider that heaven forbid their son or daughter might be in the closet and need to talk to someone or get information about sex.
Parents usually will be the last source they would go to.
It took almost 10 years before my parents came to terms with my homosexuality and it was a teacher / counselor that gave me the information that I needed at the time.
I was scared to death to even bring up the subject with them.
Maybe in the future the kids will be able to sue the parents for denying them education that they needed, but perhaps this is what this is all about.
Alberta Believer So Dennis evolution equals tolerance and Catholics are intolerant?
That's very tolerant of you?
No this discussion if it is to be had should be had by adults not by those who may have opinion but hence can't articulate them intelligently.
The fact this, the proposed changes are NOT the type of changes that need to be made with the so called Human Rights bureaucracy here in Alberta.
What Minister Blackett needs to do is scrap section 3 of the Alberta Human Rights legislation that allows people to be hauled before some government tribunal because someone took offense at what they said or published.
I mean this concept runs so counter to the idea of a free and democratic society, that its absurd.
As it currently stands someone in Alberta can do to MacLean's magazine as was done in Ontario, and BC because we have the same legislation here.
That is what the REAL issue regarding Human Rights in this province, not the teaching of evolution and sexuality.
The real issue is that people don't have the right to speak, practice their religion or to associate (fundamental freedoms) are under attack from the Alberta Human Rights Multiculturalism and Citizenship Commission.
Education is best I can understand the whole religious view, but sex education??
Africa and other third world countries are dealing with an AIDS crisis due in part to the lack of education...and now we want to restrict education here!?!
How many parents will adequately inform their kids on safe sex?
Lets be realistic, we can't be with them all the time so all we can do is hope they understand the consequences and are able to make informed decisions.
justin why shelter your kids from the REAL world.
how will they ever really learn
This is a personal choice for the parents.
And I agree with Dennis, if you don't want them to learn tolerance, evolution or sex ed, send them to a catholic school.
Dave S Calgary Teachers are there to teach the basics, Math, Science,Social and History and nothing else.
The Government really needs to get their long nose's out of areas that are not their concern this is just getting stupid now.
Ron J.- Calgary Dennis is obviously ignorant to what goes on inside Catholic schools.
I grew up in a Catholic school.
We learned about evolution, which as a result, I completely believe in.
My education also taught me about many other religions.
Too bad Dennis's didn't.
Teaching people about other religions (which yes you learn about in a catholic school) is a great way to learn about different cultures and teach respect to others beliefs.
Not to mention, a child not learning the proper information about sex education can lead to a lot of problems.
I would need to use my toes and fingers to count for how many people I know now in their twenties that still don't know things about STI's and other infections, all because they didn't get the chance to learn it.
Amber In response to Dennis, I find your statement a little ironic in that it's not very tolerant towards those who attend catholic schools.
Also it is ill informed.
I attended catholic school where I learned about evolution within the science curriculum.
I also learned tolerance through peer interaction as well as within my religious studies classes where I learned not only about Catholicism but Hinduism, Buddhism, Mormonism and other religions.
Please inform yourself prior to speaking out against the separate system.
IT Manager from Edmonton Nice Dennis, typical Liberal attitude that only approved values are allowed to be taught.
Our kids go to a Catholic school becuase, well that's our business isn't it.
Which is sort of the point of this debate, parental rights vs. states rights.
And on this discussion parental rights must win out.
Human rights are not somthing you can cherry pick so what if next time it's parental rights vs. something Liberals don't approve of?
Does that mean it is OK for my kids to not take that subject?
Brian the Cynic I think Alberta needs to select a song as the province's official anthem.
I have a very appropriate one in mind: "Dueling Banjos," from the movie "Deliverance."
This legislation continues the not so proud tradition that allows people to take issue with others simply because what they say offends their little sympathies.