ON a recent Wednesday afternoon at Memorial Elementary, a public school in East Hampton, the public-address announcer called out groups of pre-kindergarten through thirrd-grade students who were to be dismissed for the day.
There were about 20 children that day and each one, some as young as 4, sat down cross-legged on the carpet in front of a woman playing guitar, ''Good news: Jesus died for me,'' they sang together, ''Good news: I can be saved eternally.''
Parents from other schools have contacted the group's Connecticut office and inquired about how to start their own, the group said.
''Public schools should have the right to deny access to sectarian groups that seek to convert young children,'' said the Rev. Barry W. Lynn, executive director of Americans United for the Separation of Church and State.
In June 2001, the court overturned a federal appeals court decision in New York that excluded a Good News Club from equal access to a public school building after school hours.
In a 6-3 decision, the Supreme Court wrote that it did not believe the danger that ''children would misperceive the endorsement of religion is any greater than the danger that they would perceive a hostility toward the religious viewpoint if the club were excluded from the public forum.''
Since that decision, public school districts and principals uncomfortable with the high court's finding have been left with two choices if they don't want a Good News Club in their school: live with their discomfort or get rid of all their after-school programs.
Warren Logee, principal of John F. Kennedy Elementary, said Child Evangelism Fellowship contacted him after applying to use a classroom. ''
Last spring, a Milwaukee principal, Dorothy Smith, canceled meetings of the Good News Club at her school.
Ms. Smith also said students told their parents and teachers that talk of sin and hell was frightening them.
After canceling the club, Ms. Smith received a letter from the Liberty Counsel.
''As long as there's parental involvement, they're utilizing the building as any other group,'' said John M. DeGennaro, the district's superintendent of schools who points out that the same school is used after hours for scouts, soccer club, language classes, and the rotary club.
''Whether it's a sailing club, a ski club or an evangelical group, and as long as it's not a school activity connected to school curriculum, then we are responsible for giving them access to the schools,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''
We are supportive of after-school activities of a positive nature.''
This is not the first time that Memorial in East Hampton has been used for after-school religious instruction.
Catholic education classes have been taught there for about 12 years, said Laura Flanagan, religious education administrator at St. Patrick's, East Hampton's Roman Catholic church.
Parents are told about the classes in church or through local advertising.
Child Evangelism Fellowship asks school administrators to send children home with a pamphlet and permission slip.
The purpose is to evangelize boys and girls with the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.''
And at what point is this intruding on the separation of church and state?''
(Schools do have a legal right to exclude controversial groups because of safety concerns if their presence at the school would be disruptive and dangerous.)
In a dissenting opinion in the Supreme Court case last June, Justice David H. Souter wrote, ''It is beyond question that Good News intends to use the public school premises not for the mere discussion of a subject from a particular, Christian point of view, but for an evangelical service of worship calling children to commit themselves in an act of Christian conversion.''
Those who oppose the clubs said their underlying intention is to change someone's religion on public school grounds, and that Child Evangelism Fellowship's target is not necessarily restricted to the 7-year-old child in the Good News Club.
Many times the child's own witness results in the salvation of parents.''
''Our goal is that the child might have the victory they need within their own life,'' said Myron Tschetter, vice president of USA Ministries for the fellowship, ''and if their life is turned around from a life filled with hate to a life filled with love, that will have a profound influence on the parents.''
After she told the children that as a consequence of David's adulterous ways, Bathsheba's baby died, she noted that there would be ''consequences for you, too, if you decide to sin.''
Ms. LePage then asked any of the children who had not yet accepted Jesus as their personal savior to ''quietly come up and talk with me over here.''
Mr. Tschetter of USA Ministries said he believed young children have mental capacities that adults don't always understand. ''
You're asking a great deal of a child at that age to make the distinction between church and state, most can't.
In accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior interest in receiving the included information for research and educational purposes.