Where school officials have a practice of excusing students from class on the basis of parents' requests for accommodation of nonreligious needs, religiously motivated requests for excusal may not be accorded less favorable treatment.
In addition, in some circumstances, based on federal or state constitutional law or pursuant to state statutes, schools may be required to make accommodations that relieve substantial burdens on students' religious exercise.
Schools officials are therefore encouraged to consult with their attorneys regarding such obligations.
Religious Expression and Prayer in Class Assignments
Students may express their beliefs about religion in homework, artwork, and other written and oral assignments free from discrimination based on the religious content of their submissions.
Such home and classroom work should be judged by ordinary academic standards of substance and relevance and against other legitimate pedagogical concerns identified by the school.
Thus, if a teacher's assignment involves writing a poem, the work of a student who submits a poem in the form of a prayer (for example, a psalm) should be judged on the basis of academic standards (such as literary quality) and neither penalized nor rewarded on account of its religious content.
"CEF offers students educational, cultural, and recreational                         opportunities that are similar to activities offered by other                        community organizations that submit fliers for inclusion in the                        [students'] take- home folders.
"An integral part of CEF's evangelical mission is to locate                         children who have not yet accepted Jesus Christ as their                        Savior," the school district's attorneys wrote.
Eliott Mincberg, spokesperson of  People for the American Way, opposes the Bush administration's effort to open public schools to religious organizations.
New guidelines issued by the U.S. Department of Education concerning religious activity in public schools give a "green light for prayer bullying" and do nothing to protect students who do not wish to participate in such events, American Atheists charged today.
"The push for religious expression in public schools is due to the fact that religious groups insist on turning our public schools not only into supernatural recruiting grounds, but religious battlefields also."
The relationship between religion and government in the United States is governed by the First Amendment to the Constitution, which both prevents the government from establishing religion and protects privately initiated religious expression and activities from government interference and discrimination.
Nor may school officials grant religious speakers preferential access to public audiences, or otherwise select public speakers on a basis that favors religious speech.
In Santa Fe Independent School District v. Doe [ 8 ], for example, the Court invalidated a school's football game speaker policy on the ground that it was designed by school officials to result in pregame prayer, thus favoring religious expression over secular expression.
Although the Constitution forbids public school officials from directing or favoring prayer, students do not "shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the schoolhouse gate," [ 9 ] and the Supreme Court has made clear that "private religious speech, far from being a First Amendment orphan, is as fully protected under the Free Speech Clause as secular private expression."
[ 11 ] For example, "nothing in the Constitution ... prohibits any public school student from voluntarily praying at any time before, during, or after the school day," [ 12 ] and students may pray with fellow students during the school day on the same terms and conditions that they may engage in other conversation or speech.
For instance, where schools permit student expression on the basis of genuinely neutral criteria and students retain primary control over the content of their expression, the speech of students who choose to express themselves through religious means such as prayer is not attributable to the state and therefore may not be restricted because of its religious content.
After Christmas break in early 2002, India said three boys chased her down a hall at Horace Maynard Middle School, grabbed her by the neck and said, "You better change your religion or we'll change it for you."
The lawsuit said school officials took no disciplinary action.
India's father, Greg Tracy said, "That was pretty much the last straw because she was terrified"  The Tracys took India out of school on Feb. 26, 2002.
They then filed a federal lawsuit against Union County schools, claiming the crusade, prayers over the loudspeaker, a Christmas nativity play, a Bible handout and other proselytizing activities in the rural school system have become so pervasive they are a threat to safety and religious liberty.
In a May 2 legal response, school officials said they acted appropriately, denied the attacks happened, or said they were unaware of them.
It all started when Tracy declined to attend Baptist Pastor Gary Beeler's annual crusade because of her family's pagan religion.
For the past 6 years Union County TN students are excused from class, loaded onto school buses with teachers and sent to Christian revival meetings for three days.
The AP story quotes an Rev. Beeler, evangelical leader speaking to students before they boarded the bus: "I am going to ask you a question.
Union County school spokesman Wayne Goforth claims, "We do not endorse, promote or prohibit" evangelical rallies on school time.
The school officials argue that their system is neutral when it comes to religious activities, because the crusade is voluntary, teachers chaperone on their own time and school buses are operated by private contractors.
According to Charles Haynes, a senior scholar at the Freedom Forum's First Amendment Center in Arlington, Va., the school officials need a "crash course on the meaning of the First Amendment - especially the part that separates church from state."
India Tracy was a model middle school student: She belonged to the leadership-service organization Beta Club, chess club, and band.
She was a straight-A student and the only girl on the middle school football team.
Now she takes Internet courses at home and hopes to transfer to a public school in Knoxville, 25 miles away.
Schools hit with religion-related lawsuit; action claims student was beaten,�harassed student was beaten, harassed for being different
Christy Ballard, legal counsel to the Tennessee Department of Education, "All local boards of education have the authority to allow students to voluntarily attend these types of events.
Where students or other private graduation speakers are selected on the basis of genuinely neutral, evenhanded criteria and retain primary control over the content of their expression, however, that expression is not attributable to the school and therefore may not be restricted because of its religious (or anti-religious) content.
To avoid any mistaken perception that a school endorses student or other private speech that is not in fact attributable to the school, school officials may make appropriate, neutral disclaimers to clarify that such speech (whether religious or nonreligious) is the speaker's and not the school's.
Baccalaureate Ceremonies
School officials may not mandate or organize religious ceremonies.
However, if a school makes its facilities and related services available to other private groups, it must make its facilities and services available on the same terms to organizers of privately sponsored religious baccalaureate ceremonies.
In addition, a school may disclaim official endorsement of events sponsored by private groups, provided it does so in a manner that neither favors nor disfavors groups that meet to engage in prayer or religious speech.
[ 1 ] The relevant portions of the First Amendment provide: "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech . . . ." U.S. Const.
The Supreme Court has held that the Fourteenth Amendment makes these provisions applicable to all levels of government-federal, state, and local-and to all types of governmental policies and activities.
See Everson v. Board of Educ., 330 U.S. 1 (1947); Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U.S. 296 (1940).
[ 2 ] See, e.g., Everson, 330 U.S. at 18 (the First Amendment "requires the state to be a neutral in its relations with groups of religious believers and non-believers; it does not require the state to be their adversary.
State power is no more to be used so as to handicap religions than it is to favor them"); Good News Club v. Milford Cent.
[ 3 ] Santa Fe Indep.
v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226, 250 (1990) (plurality opinion)); accord Rosenberger v. Rector of Univ. of Virginia, 515 U.S. 819, 841 (1995).
[ 4 ] Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421 (1962) (invalidating state laws directing the use of prayer in public schools); School Dist.
v. Schempp, 374 U.S. 203 (1963) (invalidating state laws and policies requiring public schools to begin the school day with Bible readings and prayer); Mergens, 496 U.S. at 252 (plurality opinion) (explaining that "a school may not itself lead or direct a religious club").
The Supreme Court has also held, however, that the study of the Bible or of religion, when presented objectively as part of a secular program of education (e.g., in history or literature classes), is consistent with the First Amendment.
See Schempp, 374 U.S. at 225.
[ 5 ] See Lee v. Weisman, 505 U.S. 577, 599 (1992); see also Wallace v. Jaffree, 472 U.S. 38 (1985).
[ 7 ] 505 U.S. 577 (1992).
[ 8 ] 530 U.S. 290 (2000).
[ 9 ] Tinker v. Des Moines Indep.
[ 10 ] Capitol Square Review &amp; Advisory Bd.
[ 12 ] Santa Fe, 530 U.S. at 313.
[ 13 ] For example, the First Amendment permits public school officials to review student speeches for vulgarity, lewdness, or sexually explicit language.
Bethel Sch.
[ 14 ] Rosenberger v. Rector of Univ. of Virginia, 515 U.S. 819 (1995); Board of Educ.
v. Mergens, 496 U.S. 226 (1990); Good News Club v. Milford Cent.
Sch., 533 U.S. 98 (2001); Lamb's Chapel v. Center Moriches Union Free Sch.
Dist., 508 U.S. 384 (1993); Widmar v. Vincent, 454 U.S. 263 (1981); Santa Fe, 530 U.S. at 304 n.15.
In addition, in circumstances where students are entitled to pray, public schools may not restrict or censor their prayers on the ground that they might be deemed "too religious" to others.
The Establishment Clause prohibits state officials from making judgments about what constitutes an appropriate prayer, and from favoring or disfavoring certain types of prayers-be they "nonsectarian" and "nonproselytizing" or the opposite - over others.
See Engel v. Vitale, 370 U.S. 421, 429-30 (1962) (explaining that "one of the greatest dangers to the freedom of the individual to worship in his own way lay in the Government's placing its official stamp of approval upon one particular kind of prayer or one particular form of religious services," that "neither the power nor the prestige" of state officials may "be used to control, support or influence the kinds of prayer the American people can say," and that the state is "without power to prescribe by law any particular form of prayer"); Weisman, 505 U.S. at 594.
[ 15 ] Santa Fe, 530 U.S. at 302; Mergens, 496 U.S. at 248-50.
[ 16 ] Mergens, 496 U.S. at 250 (plurality opinion); id.
[ 17 ] Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 845-46; Mergens, 496 U.S. at 248 (plurality opinion); id.
From: Monica Romero Sent: Wednesday, January 15, 2003  Subject: religious-Wiccan freedom infringed in MS
A friend of mine's daughter is 11 years old and is Wiccan.
This is no ordinary 11 year old-she has an IQ of 172, an attends accelerated classes.
She attends public school in Lafayette Co.
Student speakers at student assemblies and extracurricular activities such as sporting events may not be selected on a basis that either favors or disfavors religious speech.
Where student speakers are selected on the basis of genuinely neutral, evenhanded criteria and retain primary control over the content of their expression, that expression is not attributable to the school and therefore may not be restricted because of its religious (or anti-religious) content.
By contrast, where school officials determine or substantially control the content of what is expressed, such speech is attributable to the school and may not include prayer or other specifically religious (or anti-religious) content.
To avoid any mistaken perception that a school endorses student speech that is not in fact attributable to the school, school officials may make appropriate, neutral disclaimers to clarify that such speech (whether religious or nonreligious) is the speaker's and not the school's.
Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 506 (1969).
v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 683-86 (1986).
The following emails (posted here with permission of writer, mother, and daughter) tell a story with a happy ending.
Her mother is Roman Catholic but is fully supportive of her daughter's choice and religion.
The teacher made the Statement that Jews were going to Hell because they don't believe in Jesus -- that's when the "fun" started.
The teacher asked if that meant she was a Witch, she answered that some would call her a Witch.
Then the teacher physically removed her from the classroom with 2 police officers (who patrol the school).
They bring her to the principal's office and call in a therapist (not the guidance counselor) from Ole Miss University (without the parent's consent -- mom was home).
The therapist tells her that Witches are pretend and are not a religion.
The therapist then asked her if she thought Harry Potter was real-- the girl stated "that's a stupid question, he is a fictional character in books and movies."
The teacher asked her what religion she was, and she told her.
She even advised the therapist that she didn't practice spell casting yet, she is still studying, but that Wicca definitely is her religion and faith.
I know I am taking this personally, being Wiccan, but the mother wants to fight this too.
Please post this message wherever the original message (see below) was posted.
After a bombardment of phone calls, and mailed information on religious freedom, legal precedents, and information on Wicca/Paganism in general, the meeting was postponed and rescheduled by the school for this past Friday.
The professor is making a special point to focus on Wicca and Earth Based religions, and the professor will be assisted by two Wiccan associates at the University.
This has been a problem in the past, when the child is simply sitting in a circle with 3 friends, or meditating (alone) at recess by an Oak tree.
PS- According to the School Board there were a several phone calls received from an individual where the caller stated whoever was responsible for the child's persecution would be going to hell.
Again thanks to Everyone, if the situation changes - for the better or worse, I will update everyone ASAP.
Constitutional Claims for Student Religious Clubs.
Student religious groups have often requested permission to meet in vacant public school classrooms during school club periods held either before or after school, or, less frequently, during free periods during the school day.
The Supreme Court has held that a public university which allowed secular extracurricular student groups use of empty classrooms could not deny access to student religious groups.
Since the university was a limited public forum (a place deliberately set aside for members of the student body to express and exchange views), the university's rule distinguishing between secular and religious groups constituted an impermissible discrimination against speech based on the content of the speech.
The Court concluded that the bare granting of access to religious clubs did not amount to the university aiding or endorsing religion.
It therefore invalidated the university's rule against the use of its premises by religious clubs.
The lower federal courts have divided on the question of whether this ruling should be applied to elementary and secondary schools.
However, this unanswered constitutional question is now of practical import only in those cases in which the Equal Access Act does not apply; that is, in the case of non-elementary and non-secondary schools or during instructional time.
Those cases are far less likely to involve limited public forums, and therefore, present a far easier case for excluding religious speech.
The Equal Access Act:
The Equal Access Act provides a statutory basis for claims for and against extra-curricular religious clubs.
As a result, constitutional claims are now of secondary importance.
The Act is a complex piece of legislation.
In brief, the Act provides that a secondary school that chooses to allow non-curriculum related student-initiated groups to meet before or after, but apparently not during, the school day may not discriminate against any other student-initiated club based on its philosophic, religious or political content.
Thus, the Act confers a right upon all student clubs to meet, but only if school officials permit non-curriculum clubs to meet.
Curriculum-related clubs (e.g., the Spanish Club) do not trigger the provisions of the Act.
Schools are free under the Act to insist that each meeting be attended by a school employee, who may only maintain order, preserve discipline, protect the rights of other students, or prevent illegal acts.
Teachers' Rights to Hold Religious Meetings:
Unless a school permits teachers to use empty classrooms for meetings on whatever topic they choose, teachers have no right to hold religious meetings in an empty public school classroom, before or after school, even when only other teachers will be in attendance.
However, teachers may informally discuss religious topics among themselves, provided those discussions do not interfere with their duties and do not take place in the presence of students.
Rental of School Facilities:
The question of equal access to student clubs must be distinguished from the question of whether school officials may make school facilities available for after-hours use by religious groups, even if no religious symbols are displayed when the public schools are in session.
If broadly available to community groups, school facilities probably must be made available to religious groups on a less-than-permanent basis upon the payment of a fee approximating either the cost of the facilities (heat, light, maintenance) or, perhaps, the fair rental value.
At a minimum, religious groups may not be excluded because school officials disapprove of the viewpoint they express.
Holiday Observances:
In the leading decision on public school celebrations of religious holidays, an appellate court upheld school board rules which permitted the observance of holidays with both a secular and religious basis, provided that the observances were conducted in a "prudent and objective manner."
The court was careful to point out that the rules adopted by the school board were, as written, constitutional; however, particular events conducted under the authority of the rules might nevertheless be unconstitutional.
The rules in question permitted the display of religious symbols as teaching aids, and provided that religious works of drama and music could be performed as well as studied.
Students who objected to participating in Christmas observances were to be excused.
In a similar vein, it has been noted by the Supreme Court that the singing of carols at Christmas time is a common occurrence in the public schools.
In general, however, the constitutional problems with public school holiday observances are not cured by observing the holidays of all faiths, although they are exacerbated when the schools observe only the holidays of one faith.
Baccalaureate Services and Graduation:
The Supreme Court recently held that school officials may not invite a clergyman to begin or end a graduation ceremony with a prayer, even though the prayer may be non-denominational and even though attendance at graduation is voluntary.
One appellate court has held that the graduating students may choose to have a prayer offered, although other courts - and the weight of authority disagree.
Because attendance at baccalaureate services is not compulsory, and frequently takes place away from the public school, some authorities have refused to interfere with the practice.
Of course, the Constitution does not prohibit a purely private baccalaureate service.
Two courts have permitted privately sponsored baccalaureate services to take place in rented public school facilities if appropriate disclaimers of public school involvement are posted.
Certainly no student may be compelled to attend such a service, or be penalized for a failure to do so.
Compulsory Attendance and Religious Holidays:
School officials are required, by federal statute, to accommodate students' religious practices unless the officials can demonstrate that they have a compelling interest in not doing so.
Two types of conflicts arise from conflicts between the school calendar and religious holidays.
However, a policy of excusal must be available equally to members of all faiths .
While public schools need not close on religious holidays, they may do so as a matter of administrative convenience, where, for example, large numbers of teachers or students are absent.
When a school chooses not to close on days observed by some students as religious holidays, conflicts between scheduled events and religious holidays will exist.
One court has held that school officials may, without unconstitutionally establishing religion, prohibit the scheduling of extra- curricular activities on Friday night, Saturday and Sunday morning to avoid conflicts with students' religious observances.
And another court has held that penalties (such as the refusal to provide make-up examinations or the lowering of grades) cannot be imposed on students absent for religious holidays.
A school need not, however, reschedule graduation in order to avoid a conflict with the Sabbath (&amp; Sabbats) observed by some of the graduates.
Students may not be compelled to wear gym clothes which, for religious reasons, they consider immodest.
Two key decisions on this matter are in conflict as to the appropriate remedy.
One Court held that such students must be offered excusal from mixed gym classes in order to avoid exposure to those wearing what they consider to be immodest clothing.
The other Court held that, while students themselves must be allowed to dress modestly, they would not be allowed to absent themselves from the class to avoid viewing others dressed immodestly or to avoid ridicule for their chaste dress.
Students with religious objections to mixed gym classes, but only such students, may be offered sex-segregated gym classes without violating federal law.
For more information contact: Pat Lewis National Jewish Democratic Council 711 Second Street, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20002 (202) 544-7636
Part II: THINGS TO DO NOW
Become involved with the pagan community, even if you are a solitaire.
This can help provide you with support and contacts when the going gets rough.
This way you can obtain information and connections that can help your case.
As mentioned above, sometimes having an ordained pagan minister or other well connected person talk with the government agency involved call resolve problems satisfactorily.
They recognize paganism as a legitimate path (and have a pagan specific organization called CUUPS.)
They also have a wonderful comparative religions course for their Sunday School.
This is one way you can say "I go to church" without compromising your religious beliefs.
The UU Church is also very well equipped in dealing with religious rights issues.
Become involved in your community, or at least become acquainted with your neighbors.
People are less likely to accuse you of nasty stuff if they know you.
Or if someone does lay such claims or rumors, it will have less fertile ground to grow in.
Provide your children with some sort of religious teaching even if you believe the child should decide.
The courts may tend to favor a parent who does teach some sort of religious ethic over a parent who doesn't.
Remember that the same rights that protect you protect ex-spouses and relatives and their beliefs.
So don't blow a gasket when dear old Grandma wants to take their grandchild to their church.
Instead look on it as an educational opportunity for your child.
This will be an opportunity to teach your child religious tolerance.
Kids are very smart and will, on their own, pick up any discrepancies.
Part III THINGS TO DO IF YOU SUSPECT OR HAVE A PROBLEM
If you can't do so during a conversation, do so as soon as you can afterwards.
Note date, time and witnesses; add any information that can help your case.
Include as much detail as possible.
Send all letters by certified mail or Return Receipt Requested.
Only send faxes if you can verify the fax was sent and received.
Always copy your lawyer.
Keep your temper!
Be polite and gracious at all times.
Get an attorney even if no legal action has happened yet.
It will save you more money and headache in the long run.
Make sure they are experienced in family or constitutional law.
Write things down!
(Did I say that already?)
Answer only the question asked.
Do not, for any reason, offer any extra information especially when dealing with the police or CPS.
What you think may be helpful, may actually prove to be harmful.
Remember: Everything you say can and will be used against you!
Write things down!
Find out NOW from an attorney what the state laws are governing illegal search and seizure.
You need to find out if inviting law enforcement or social services into your home without a warrant, waives your right under illegal search.
If it does, don't let any official in your home without a warrant.
Get an attorney.
Tell the lawyer everything, including your religion, any past history, etc.
Be willing to follow their advise and offer to help in any way you can.
By doing some of the footwork, you may save yourself some money.
Call a religious rights organizations for help.
Even if you have an attorney, call one of these organizations.
They can save you time and money by providing research supporting religious rights for your attorney.
If you have to go to court or before CPS or an attorney, dress conservatively.
Wash your hair.
Wear NO occult jewelry.
The object is to appear "normal."
Don't create a media circus.
Most judges despise that kind of thing and it can backfire.
If media attention is> required, let your attorney or religious rights organization that you are working with handle it, so everything is done in an organized manner.
Part IV: ABSOLUTE DON'TS
Don't volunteer any information.
Only answer the question asked.
Don't mention magic of any kind.
(Face it, magic is vastly misunderstood.
You don't have the luxury or time to educate in these circumstances.)
Don't sign anything without the advice of an attorney.
Even if signing a form means you'll get your children back immediately, it is still in your best interest to consult with an attorney.
You may end up signing something which will create serious problems or headaches down the road.
Remember, it is illegal for an government agency to insist on a child regularly attending a Christian church.
Remember, religious freedom is a right in this country, even if we still have to fight for it.
There are now several religious rights organizations who can lend assistance and sometimes refer lawyers.
But it is important for pagan parents to know the law, know what resources are available and how the system works.
Knowledge is power.
Before Bush's  Theocracy
These no longer apply, but are included for comparative purposes.
Press Release from American Jewish Congress printed here for historical purposes; alas, establishment of religion is now encroaching on religious minorities.
The following is a very brief summary of a comprehensive report by AJCongress, titled "Religion in the Public Schools."
Copies of that report, which includes citations for decisions on this topic, are available from AJCongress.
School Prayer:
The Supreme Court first held in Engel v. Vitale (1962) that the practice of having a prayer recited daily in the classroom, even if non-denominational, is unconstitutional.
This holding has been repeatedly reaffirmed, most recently in Lee v. Weisman (1992).
The prayer at issue in Engel was composed by the state.
Although the opinion makes it appear as if that fact alone decided the case, subsequent cases have held that all school-sponsored prayers and religious exercises are unconstitutional.
That includes, for example, opening exercises consisting of the reading of passages from the Bible, even where participation in such exercises is "voluntary."
This rule against officially-sponsored religious exercises is thus not overcome by requiring students to choose between attending the prayer session or going to another classroom.
Nor is it permissible to permit student volunteers to select the prayers for public recitation, either in the classroom or at school assemblies.
Lower courts have generally extended the ban on school prayers to include all regular school functions, including assemblies and athletic events.
In one case, an appellate court held that a school district could not constitutionally delegate the task of offering prayers at high school football games to the local Ministerial Association.
Equally unconstitutional was an "equal access" plan under which student volunteers could recite prayers of their own choosing as part of a pre-game ceremony.
Similarly, the common practice of high school coaches leading a team in prayer, or calling upon a team member to do so, is unconstitutional.
Individual students, however, may engage in private, quiet, religious activities, so long as the conduct is not disruptive and does not interfere with the right of others to be left alone.
Contrary to what is sometimes said by advocates of prayer in the public schools, the Supreme Court has not prohibited students from reading the Bible, praying, reciting the rosary, or informally discussing religious subjects with classmates.
On the contrary, any official interference with such activities would itself be unconstitutional, unless demonstrably necessary to maintain order in the school or to protect the rights of other students.
Thus, a teacher may not insist on teaching creationism, or resist teaching evolution, on the theory that evolution is a religious viewpoint.
And public school teachers may not pray with, or in the presence of, their students.
A teacher who abuses his or her position in this way may be terminated.
The extent to which school authorities may set aside a moment for silent prayer or meditation remains unclear, as courts have continued to send mixed signals in this regard.
Moment-of-silence statutes not mentioning prayer will likely be found constitutional.
But even if a statute is not unconstitutional as written, it can be implemented in an unconstitutional way, e.g., if students are told to bow their heads or stand for the moment-of-silence, or if a teacher urges that the time be used for prayer.
Teaching About Religion:
The Constitution permits objective teaching about religion.
In fact, one cannot teach the history of civilization without teaching about religion.
Neither can art or music be taught without reference to religion.
Objective teaching about religion has given rise to numerous difficulties, among the most intractable of which are those arising from the teaching of "Bible as Literature" classes.
It has been suggested, by one court, that only regularly certified public school teachers, not uncertified ministers, can teach such courses.
And, at the secondary school level, modern critical Bible scholarship should be included in the curriculum.
In short, to pass constitutional muster, any course on the Bible must be devoid of denominational bias.
Public school libraries may include significant religious literature, provided that no one sect's literature is favored, and the library as a whole does not show any preference for religious works.
Similarly, the Ten Commandments may not be displayed on classroom walls.
Neither may a student painting depicting the crucifixion be left on permanent display in the school auditorium.
Use of Classroom Space For Student-Initiated Religious Activities:
&gt; That India was repeatedly called "Satan worshipper," "witch" and other derogatory names.
She was     accused of eating babies and of being a lesbian because she wasn't a Christian, the lawsuit said.
&gt; That India was forced to attend regular Bible study classes during the school day, and urged to lead     the school and her class in prayer.
&gt; That derogatory names were written on her locker in permanent ink and the school refused to paint     over the graffiti or move her locker.
&gt; That India was repeatedly attacked as she knelt in front of her bottom-row locker.
Her head was     bashed at least 10 times, cutting her lip, above her eyes and bloodying her nose.
&gt;That a teacher told India to "keep quiet because you'll get in trouble" after she wrote a paper about    religious freedom.
&gt; That a bus driver regularly asked India in front of other students if she had gone to church yet and if     she'd like to come to church.
The Tracys' Knoxville attorney, Margaret Held, said the family did not want to sue.
They just wanted their daughter to attend a safe school without persecution.
"They tried being quiet about it and that didn't work," she said.
"I would hope that the people in Union County who have been killing their goats and beating up their kid are a minority.
If there's one thing that Christ taught, it was tolerance."
During her years at Sharps Chapel Elementary School and later at the middle school, India maintained top-notch grades.
She also was one of the few girl players on the football team, played in the band and belonged to the Beta Club and Chess Club.
Her parents pulled her out of public school nearly a year ago, after a friend of hers called to say she'd been suggesting suicide.
She was diagnosed with anxiety and has been home-schooled since then.
The suit seeks $300,000 in damages to pay India's tuition to a private school, legal fees and the cost of psychological counseling.
The suit also seeks a court prohibition against "the school system's continued religious indoctrination of children."
"Maybe it will be a harsh enough lesson so the next child in Union County who's different can continue through school and graduate and feel safe," Sarajane Tracy said.
"As a matter of fact the UU churches in the area are already offering their support and help !!!
We thought we were going to be all alone in this and instead we've been receiving sooooo much Love !!
Keep in touch and thanx,
With Love and Laughter, Sarajane Tracy]
Pagan Conservatives Respond to Issues Raised by Prayer Bullying in Union County, TN  By D'Arcy Matson
Pagans are politically and economically diverse, so when a Pagan Conservative message board discussed this case, their perspectives are interestingly different.
One said that they didn't mind that the kids went to this rally but what happened to the girl should not have been tolerated at all.
Another said that although zero tolerance definitely applies in this place, they have a slight problem with usage of common sense when applying zero tolerance to much lesser situations.
I find it extremely frustrating that people are still so intolerant when it comes to differences in religion and spirituality (or lack thereof), race, and gender.
The school is saying they neither condone or oppose (I don't remember the exact words) this rally.
Hmm, are they sending field trip permission slips home with the kids for their parents to sign?
I'm pretty sure they are, and they probably have a little more advertisement on them then just your run of the mill "my child has permission to attend this fieldtrip" on them.
I would say that's condoning it.
The kids get an excused absence for this two hour time period during these three days.
Sounds pretty supportive to me.
Then I believe they made another oops.
What happened to that girl, either they "weren't aware of it" or "it didn't happen."
Well folks, which one is it?
If they weren't aware of it, who dropped the ball?
She said she told someone in authority.
I'm sure whoever said that has kept an eagle eye on that girl that they know what happens minute by minute in that school.
My question here though, is, were the parents being advocates for their daughter when all this was happening?
If they weren't able to advocate for her, for whatever reason, did they have a support group so someone else could have advocated and maybe enlightened the school board on some diversity issues?
(Personally, my advocating would be more like a Mama bear enlightening someone who's doing harm to her cubs.)
[Editor's note: Since the battering, at least, the mother contacted the local UUs who are now a support group for her and her daughter.]
Do these people only single out Pagans, or are they the same way with Muslims, Jews, etc.
Everybody has opinions, be it on religion or whatnot.
And they do have a right to voice their opinions, that is in the constitution.
But, when the opinions become threats, and the threats become physically harmful.... that is assault and battery, and assault and battery are criminal acts!
And isn't a person that knowingly stands by and allows it to happen considered to be an accomplice?
If kids today are not taught this by parents, peers, teachers, standers-by, whoever....this will not only continue, it will escalate.
At 2-10 years of age we can tell them, "hitting is not ok."
After that age, they need to know that it is not only "not ok" it is assault and a really hard way to learn about the court and legal system, and "time out" is now served with a bunch of really scary people that would love nothing better than to.... well, now I'm rambling.
Maybe it's time Pagans should barrage the Family, Children and Happy Place administration with an onslaught of letters, emails, etc. letting them know that we are Proud, we are Pagans, our children are in your (our) schools and we are not going to "fly silently into the night."
It is time for them to act accordingly.
We pay education taxes (and the levees), too.
Talk about your Pagan Unity Campaign!
The No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 amended the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 to require that the Secretary of Education issue guidance to school administrators every 2 years on how to comply with constitutional protections of prayer in public schools.
In addition, the 2001 Act requires that each school certify its compliance in writing by March 15, 2003 to receive federal funds.
On Feb. 7, 2003, the Dept. of Education issued this
Opponents argue these new "guidelines" are based on a biased reading of case law.
Barry Lynn of Americans United for Separation of Church and State argued "Federal courts have split over the legality of some religious activities in public schools, such as so-called 'student-initiated prayer,' at public school events.
Yet these guidelines flatly state that such activities are legal."
Supporters claim the rules appropriately clarify and add an enforcement element to policies that were established in 1995 and revised in 1998.
BIRDS AND BEES 101 -- it gives examples of lies and scientific inaccuracies being taught to our teens by Bush's federally-funded abstinence-only program -- and to act to correct the situation.
In the meantime, consider enrolling your child in the Unitarian Universalist sex education program, Our Whole Lives (OWL) for accurate information, a positive attitude about sexuality, and support for diversity.
In February 2003, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that the recitation of the Pledge with the words "under God" in public schools violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment (see below).
The parties have been asked to brief this issue as well as to address an issue of legal standing.
Michael Newdow, the parent who objects to his daughter's school policy of requiring the daily recitation of the Pledge, is not married to his daughter's mother, Sandra Banning, who had sole legal custody of the child at the time of the Ninth Circuit's rulings.
Banning has said that she supports the school's Pledge policy.
Because of the custody status, there is some question as to whether the father has a sufficient standing (stake in the outcome) to bring the case.
There's an effort afoot to amend the California constitution to make California school systems give King James Bibles to every public school student, unless parents specifically filed an objection.
These Bibles would then be used as textbooks in literature classes "without devotional or denominational purpose."
If Matt McLaughlin collects 598,105 valid signatures by May 24, voters would then decide whether to amend the state's constitution authorizing the voluntary use of the Authorized or King James Version Bibles for classes in elementary, middle and high schools.
This will cost the state and local school district about $200 million,.
McLaughlin, an attorney from Huntington Beach, claims to be chair of a group composed mostly of friends and family.
He denied that the group was sponsored by any religious organization.
Is the average school teacher qualified to teach the Bible as literature to children grades 1-12?
Do they understand how to do so without representing the Bible as a devotion or denominational instruction?
This is normally taught at the college level.
Could the average high school student grasp the distinction?
How about the average first grader?
The People of California add and amend Art.
IX � 7.7 to the California Constitution, entitled "Authorized or King James Textbook" as follows:
7.7 Whereas the Authorized or King James Bible of 1611, was one of the supreme achievements of the English Renaissance, and is rightly regarded as one of the most influential books in the history of English civilization, which has served as a model of writing for generations of English-speaking people, and is an acclaimed literary work of great historic importance, and whereas it is commendable in the study of such secular disciplines as history, literature, culture, poetry, law, language, ethics, science, and philosophy, such that familiarity with the work broadens the education of the mind, and can, and for this statute shall, be done without a devotional purpose nor any denominational instruction to accept or reject its religious components , for as the general education of the populace, and not the establishment of any sectarian religion nor doctrinal instruction, shall be the purpose or effect herein (and such avowed purposes are to be clearly announced), the People therefore direct that the King James Bible, without apocrypha, conformable in spelling, capitalization, and typeface to modern text, and including the translators' preface to King James, the translators' introductory remarks to the reader, a standard concordance, a glossary defining only archaic words and pronouns, and without commentary, footnotes, or margin notes, is to be provided henceforth as a textbook for grades one through twelve to be furnished without cost to each of those pupils whose parents do not opt-out by specific objection.
The reading and study of the book shall be voluntary.
This statute shall be interpreted and applied consistent with these statements by the United States Supreme Court: "[I]ntegrated into the school curriculum, where the Bible may constitutionally be used in an appropriate study of history, civilization, ethics, comparative religion, or the like."
( Stone vs. Graham , 449 U.S. 39 (1980)), and, "It certainly may be said that the Bible is worthy of study for its literary and historic qualities.
Nothing we have said here indicates that such study of the Bible or of religion, when presented objectively as part of a secular program of education, may not be effected consistently with the First Amendment."
( School District of Abington Township vs. Schempp , 374 U.S. 225 (1963)).
Federal Appeals Court Won't Reconsider "UNDER GOD" Phrase in Pledge By Khrysso Heart LeFey February 28, 2003
A panel of the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals announced on February 28 that it will not reconsider its decision that the Pledge of Allegiance endorses religion and violates the separation of church and state because of the phrase "under God."
This affirmation by the Ninth Circuit means that in states under its jurisdiction--Alaska, Arizona, California, Hawaii, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington--the "under God" portion could be dropped from the official pledge recitation.
Fed up with the treatment, her parents filed a federal lawsuit on her behalf Thursday.
I told him I didn't want to talk about it and for him to call my parents."
The name-calling and rumor spreading began soon after the 1999 revival, India and her parents said.
Between 1999 and February 2002 when her parents removed her from Horace Maynard Middle School, the lawsuit alleges:
Michael Newdow, a California physician with a law degree, filed his original suit as a challenge to a 1954 action by Congress that inserted the phrase "under God" into the original pledge.
Although public schools may teach about religious holidays, including their religious aspects, and may celebrate the secular aspects of holidays, schools may not observe holidays as religious events or promote such observance by students."
LEGAL SMARTS FOR PAGAN PARENTS Jeannette K. Waldie This has been making the rounds on pagan e-mail lists and may be in the public domain, but we haven't been able to locate  the author.
Part I: LEGAL SMARTS FOR PAGAN PARENTS
I have been open about being a witch for over twenty years and the only instance I faced of intolerance was having old Italian women cross themselves when they saw me coming out of The Occult Shop in Toronto, Canada.
The transcript from the Pew Forum's recent event, " Under God?
A Discussion of the Constitutionality of the Pledge of Allegiance , " is now available online.
Featured speakers were Doug Laycock (Counsel of Record for 32 Christian and Jewish clergy, urging the Court to affirm the 9th Circuit's ruling) and Jay Alan Sekulow (Counsel of Record for United States Senators and Congressmen and the Committee to Protect the Pledge, urging the Court to reverse the 9th Circuit's ruling).
In February 2003, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled that the recitation of the Pledge with the words "under God" in public schools violates the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment (see below).
The parties have been asked to brief this issue as well as to address an issue of legal standing.
Michael Newdow, the parent who objects to his daughter's school policy of requiring the daily recitation of the Pledge, is not married to his daughter's mother, Sandra Banning, who had sole legal custody of the child at the time of the Ninth Circuit's rulings.
Banning has said that she supports the school's Pledge policy.
Because of the custody status, there is some question as to whether the father has a sufficient standing (stake in the outcome) to bring the case.
Press Release from the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life Under God?
The Pledge of Allegiance Debate
The transcript from the Pew Forum's recent event, " Under God?
A Discussion of the Constitutionality of the Pledge of Allegiance , " is now available online.
Featured speakers were Doug Laycock (Counsel of Record for 32 Christian and Jewish clergy, urging the Court to affirm the 9th Circuit's ruling) and Jay Alan Sekulow (Counsel of Record for United States Senators and Congressmen and the Committee to Protect the Pledge, urging the Court to reverse the 9th Circuit's ruling).
E.J. Dionne Jr. moderated the discussion, and respondent Michael Newdow contributed comments.
On June 11, 2001, the Supreme Court ruled on Good News Club v. Milford Central School .
They ruled that a community religious club could not be prevented from holding after-school meetings which included prayer and Bible instruction, as long as any other community organizations were permitted similar access.
Subsequently, a number of other cases have been settled.
Tract Wars: The Radical Right's Propaganda Aimed at Youth
Press Release from The American Tract Society FYI: A Halloween Christian Tract
Spiderman leaps from the big screen to the cover of American Tract Society's gospel tracts for Halloween to swing through the cities and suburbs across the country on gossamer cords of faith capturing the attention of damsel and demon.
The popular super hero promises to save the day for thousands of Christians who look to Halloween as the opportune time to share their faith by handing out gospel tracts with  candy treats at seasonal carnivals and festivals and from their own front porches to throngs of trick-or-treaters.
On the heels of Spiderman looms Bibleman, fighting the dastardly with doses of Scripture.
ATS Halloween tract pamphlets and assembled tract-n-toy treat bags spin the gambit of catchy themes, colorful graphics, scripture and text to connect tract readers with Jesus, and link daily life with faith and salvation for "kids" of all ages and backgrounds, according to ATS  President Dan Southern."
This year's selection combines popular favorites with a variety of new tract themes,  and includes an array of toys with tracts that add a sweet flavor of faith -- without the sugar -- sure to brighten the traditionally dark holiday with the light of Christ," Southern said.
Summer at ATS marks the beginning of their busiest evangelism tract season as churches and individuals order more than three million Halloween pieces annually --between summer and October 31.
Spiderman joins Nemo from the movie "Finding Nemo," Bibleman, and Harry Potter as some of the most popular gospel tracts for Halloween this year, according to Southern.
Spiderman treat bags include two Spiderman rings.
A bright Nemo fish toy bobs about in the Nemo tract-n-treat bag.
Other popular toys include "Scared Yet's" little green dinosaur, spiders and pumpkin toys with joke tracts, and a "Buried Treasure"  tract-n-treat bag with shiny coin treasures.
Halloween resources can be viewed and ordered from the ATS website www.atstracts.org and ordered by phone 1-800-54-TRACT.
The debate about how to teach evolution rages in  Alabama , Georgia , Nebraska and Ohio .
History of the Law 1968  Epperson v. Arkansas   The Supreme Court ruled that state laws favoring creationism and banning the teaching of evolution in public schools are unconstitutional, because they were based on Christian interpretations of biblical passages, and so establish religion.
1987 Edwards v. Aguillard The Supreme Court ruled that requiring that whenever the theory of evolution was taught in public schools, creation science had to be taught as well did not serve a clear secular purpose and therefore violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment.
Currently unchallenged in court: 2002 Ohio state school board adopted science standards requiring students to learn about criticisms of biological evolution.
2002, Cobb County, GA School Board endorsed the "discussion of disputed views of academic subjects...including the study of the origin of species."
Georgia State Schools Superintendent Kathy Cox apologized for taking the word "evolution" out of Georgia's science middle and high school curricula.
Even if religion has not been raised, always discuss your religion with your attorney if you are involved in a child custody case.
Religious rights also appear to be supported by the courts in Texas.
Often, having a ordained pagan clergy going to speak to CPS on your behalf about paganism as a positive religion is enough to settle a CPS investigation.
But, unfortunately, there are people out there who will try to use the courts to support their religious bias.