In a highly readable style, the book combines findings from surveys and interviews with parents who, with children in the last year of primary school, are in the thick of navigating school markets, family dynamics and children's perceived 'best interests'.
The 1970s saw a peak in enrolments in government secondary schools from which they have been declining ever since: in 2005, 38.2 per cent of secondary students were in non-government schools (this designation includes Catholic and other religious schools), compared to 26.4 per cent of students in 1965 (chapter 3).
It uncovers some of the ways that complex social changes are mediated through family decisions, and indicates some historical continuities in the operation and culture of non-government schools.
These values were strong factors in leading some parents to select less prestigious Catholic and other religious schools, or to seek a place in the selective government high schools.
In a related vein, the authors point to the growth in relatively modest or low-fee religious schools, which attract parents looking for an explicit and strong focus on 'values'.
Such schools also make it possible for parents to exercise choice and avoid the perceived problems of government schools while not buying into the culture and cost of the more elite private schools.
For some parents the religious orientation of these schools is important, but the more significant change is the increasing number of parents for whom this is not directly important-or who may not share the religious beliefs of the school-but who try to get their children into these schools because they find them morally and socially preferable-more affordable, better values, better community-than what else is on offer.
These schools are for many members of the middle class-and particularly for the 'cosmopolitan urban middle class'-the perfect solution, offering status and high academic results without guilt for abandoning government schools or the ethical and financial quandary of attending a non-government school.
Others saw it as another way in which regular government schools would become 'the school of last resort', depleted of high achieving students and high status cultural resources-thus entrenching educational inequality.
While these have long been hotly contested policy and political issues, one of the great strengths of this book is to show how they are played out in families; and how making choices about schooling has become a seemingly essential quality of being a 'good-middle-class-parent'.
The inter-subjective dynamics of the interviews, or the psycho-social dimensions of the narratives were not explored-this would, indeed, be another study-but one worth doing, given the complex overlay of emotions, of vulnerability and of determination that informs so much of the decision-making process about schooling.
Reading this book, one cannot help wondering how children-whose voices are absent from this study-negotiate not only the terrain of different school cultures, but manage the emotional world of relentless choice-making about their futures and the intensely-felt projections and desires of their parents.