I continue to feel incredulous that children at a secular school should have to opt OUT of religious education, and hope that eventually this system will change.
But wait, there's more... Ms Carr had handed us brochures at the start of her presentation, which we didn't have a chance to read until we went home.
The brochures read, "Victoria's young people need to know God cares for them no matter who they are or what they have done... Young Victorians need Christian school chaplains from ACCESS Ministries.
Every day of the school year, ACCESS Ministries chaplains are sharing God's love with young Victorians."
Towards the end of the publication there is a photo of the (now infamous) Evonne Paddison, together with a list of her credentials, and a description of her demeanor - "There's a passion for life at work here... It's in the way she's as comfortable lobbying for chaplaincy at Parliament as she is using 'Jerry the Puppet' to enthrall a tiny Prep student."
FIRIS would like to offer the idea that "secular" education is the foundation - and lifeblood of this nation.
Our school's provider is Access Ministries, and during the past week I have been appalled by their attempts to gain further influence in our secular school, this time via the government's National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program (NSCSWP).
She was, of course, also there to promote ACCESS Ministries as 'the best man for the job'.
Myself and other parents attending were surprised to learn that the closing date for NSCSWP grant applications was Friday 2nd March at 8pm, giving our school little more than 48 hours to finalise an application and decide on an appropriate provider/recipient who could best meet the needs of our school community.
Given that ACCESS Ministries was the only provider attending the forum, some parents expressed concerns about the possibility that, were we to nominate ACCESS Ministries as the funding recipient, proselytising would occur in our school.
Ms Carr assured us that would not happen, and said proselytising and evangelism are prohibited under the program guidelines.
She said that while ACCESS Ministries Chaplains were drawn to chaplaincy roles because of their Christian faith and values, their intention was not to push their personal religious beliefs onto other people, but to offer a variety of support services that would improve student wellbeing and meet the diverse range of needs within the school community.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.
Our concerns were heightened when we went home and did our own research... a quick check of the current Provider list on the DEEWR website reveals that there are at least 4 providers who are secular.
The brochure also includes ACCESS Ministries 'vision' for the future.
It states, "Our vision is to transform a nation... it means steering ACCESS Ministries through a phase of intense growth... and ultimately it means reaching every school student in Victoria.
I wish ACCESS Ministries were on trial, and I hope one day they (and Jerry the Puppet) will be barred from spreadin' the love at state schools.
As for our particular school, fortunately, our Principal appears to be listening to our concerns and has acknowledged that further parental consultation is warranted.