Lastly, the evidence, some of which is linked on our site, shows that good multi faith education is helpful to understanding and tolerance in a pluralist society, and this is overwhelmingly what "parents" and "teachers" want - the only one who wants differently it seems are "faith instructors" and other avowed sectarian interests.
Families are perfectly capable of choosing and engaging in religion - the Minister of Education should not negotiate with "faith instructors" in order to introduce sectarian programs in the schools - this is exactly what is happening here, and raising the concerns of organizations in the business of doing "faith instruction" above the interests of teachers and families is a violation of the basic rights of citizens in a society based on the idea of religious toleration and freedom.
The last thing "faith instructors" want - is to have to ask people to sign up and attend "on their own".
We are sick and tired of being told by "faith instructors" and their enablers, that there are no issues, or "lets not throw the baby out with the bath water".
The baby in the bath is the loud complaining of "faith instructors" who are scared to death that without the schools giving them a half hour that their enrollments will shrink.
FIRIS gets mail from a concerned parent who is not in the "inner-urban" zone where ACCESS Ministries is based ... this parent is wise enough to know when the fix is in.
The parents participating in the VCAT hearing should be commended for their commitment and courage.
My children attend a state school in Melbourne's leafy outer east... Evonne Paddison may be shocked to know there is a "small, secularist group" alive and kicking here too, even though we are not "inner-urban".
Both of my children have opted out of CRE classes run at the school.
I continue to feel incredulous that children at a secular school should have to opt OUT of religious education, and hope that eventually this system will change.
Our school's provider is Access Ministries, and during the past week I have been appalled by their attempts to gain further influence in our secular school, this time via the government's National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program (NSCSWP).
On Wednesday 29th Feb, parents were invited to attend a forum at which Ainsley Carr, a representative from ACCESS Ministries, was present to answer our questions about the National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program.
She was, of course, also there to promote ACCESS Ministries as 'the best man for the job'.
The school Principal was also present at the forum.
Myself and other parents attending were surprised to learn that the closing date for NSCSWP grant applications was Friday 2nd March at 8pm, giving our school little more than 48 hours to finalise an application and decide on an appropriate provider/recipient who could best meet the needs of our school community.
Given that ACCESS Ministries was the only provider attending the forum, some parents expressed concerns about the possibility that, were we to nominate ACCESS Ministries as the funding recipient, proselytising would occur in our school.
Ms Carr assured us that would not happen, and said proselytising and evangelism are prohibited under the program guidelines.
She said that while ACCESS Ministries Chaplains were drawn to chaplaincy roles because of their Christian faith and values, their intention was not to push their personal religious beliefs onto other people, but to offer a variety of support services that would improve student wellbeing and meet the diverse range of needs within the school community.
When asked about other possible providers for the role, Ms Carr informed us that all the providers on the list were Christian organisations.
She finished her presentation by thanking us for asking such "wonderful questions", stated that it was wonderful for her to have the opportunity to answer "such interesting questions" and even claimed that, in her previous experiences of liaising with other schools, she had never been presented with these sorts of questions before.
One parent later commented to me that she found it hard not to vomit in response to Ms Carr's saccharine manner and patronizing comments.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.
Our concerns were heightened when we went home and did our own research... a quick check of the current Provider list on the DEEWR website reveals that there are at least 4 providers who are secular.
But wait, there's more... Ms Carr had handed us brochures at the start of her presentation, which we didn't have a chance to read until we went home.
The brochures read, "Victoria's young people need to know God cares for them no matter who they are or what they have done... Young Victorians need Christian school chaplains from ACCESS Ministries.
Every day of the school year, ACCESS Ministries chaplains are sharing God's love with young Victorians."
Towards the end of the publication there is a photo of the (now infamous) Evonne Paddison, together with a list of her credentials, and a description of her demeanor - "There's a passion for life at work here... It's in the way she's as comfortable lobbying for chaplaincy at Parliament as she is using 'Jerry the Puppet' to enthrall a tiny Prep student."
The brochure also includes ACCESS Ministries 'vision' for the future.
It states, "Our vision is to transform a nation... it means steering ACCESS Ministries through a phase of intense growth... and ultimately it means reaching every school student in Victoria.
We know just the right person for the job."
All I can say to that is, Holy S*#%.
I wish ACCESS Ministries were on trial, and I hope one day they (and Jerry the Puppet) will be barred from spreadin' the love at state schools.
As for our particular school, fortunately, our Principal appears to be listening to our concerns and has acknowledged that further parental consultation is warranted.
Apparently in Australian Schools, the metric for determining the curriculum and programming is not "is this as good as we can do"?
It is, "Does this really do any harm"?
This is the classic, "she'll be right" view.
Gross is saying in effect, lets not object to something that isn't doing any real harm (one assumes here that Gross views schools that produce Christians as doing harm to kids) therefore Gross would cry foul about SRI policy if it could be shown to be effective at converting children to Christianity.
Since it is only a half hour, and since there are other influences that might keep kids from being Christians, (Gross sites, family, friends, the TV and "the internet" as factors that keep kids from getting brainwashed by ACCESS), Gross reckons, "she'll be right, mate".
The mind reels.
We know why ACCESS Ministry exists, it is the same reason that any "missionary" group exists.
The question isn't "should we worry that they are effective"?
Everyone, even ACCESS Ministries, who want to convert kids to Christ, agrees that they are not being effective!
The question here isn't whether ACCESS is incompetent at bringing children to Christ in Australia's largest "mission field" (aka, the schools) it is whether they are breaking the law by violating important rights that families and children have in our country.
When a child is bullied we don't ask, well did it really hurt that much, before we judge bullying to be wrong - and even though ACCESS and its volunteers are incompetent, this doesn't excuse what they are doing, or make it "OK".
Would it be OK if the town sent someone to Godless Gross's house to say the grace?
What if they said it softly so that it was barely audible?
Would you appreciate it the town just sent over someone from the church to offer to say grace, and asked you to sign a form before you sat down to your meal indicating your interest in the volunteer saying grace at your dinner table (it would only be right at the beginning and said softly) - I mean since when "harm" become a determining factory for the basic right to privacy in matters of religion?
The question here is whether the church should have a state legislated right to operate a youth ministry endorsed by the Minister of Education in the government schools, and if so, what the terms are under which this will occur.
No one measures it, no one evaluates it - it simply exists because a group of church activists have it, and don't want to not have it.
In 1950, the Victorian Parliament reversed a 70 year policy of conducting secular instruction.
Rather than remove the "secular" provision that forms the "principles" of the original law and therefore is the "foundation" of the education system itself, the law was amended to allow an "exception".
Today this exception is a form of franchise run by a parachurch youth ministry which can claim certain rights under the law to present religious instruction.
Additionally, working with allies in the Department of Education, the way parents are informed about this program is designed to downplay the things that any normal person would find troubling - and to emphasize things that everyone thinks is useful.
Gross argues in his piece that the Melinda Richards was caught in a "perverse paradox" - arguing that SRI was "valuable", in order to show that the children not taking it were missing out.
The Judge also noted this point, asking Richards several times, "so can it be said that there is any benefit in SRI, if parents say they don't want it for their kids".
The case depends on the discrimination against the unbelievers' kids who had to sit out and do quiet reading or engage in that oxymoron, educational computer games.
And this is the paradox.
In order to show that the godless kids were discriminated against, the barrister for the families had to show how good the SRI was!
Because the SRI was integrated into the syllabus and taught, those who did not participate were suffering a "denial of access".
It was a perverse paradox
Richards did make the argument that SRI has been and is promoted as "something that is good for you even if you are not religious", because it contains many things and ideas that have "secular value", to do this she simply read from the information given to parents about "The agreed Christian syllabus called "Religion in Life".
Complements lesson themes and current departmental policy
builds on the VELS as they relate to the physical, personal and social learning strand
helps children explore their own lives for meaning and purpose
introduces children to the religious life and ideas of their community
provides some understanding of the stories, festivals, worship, and symbols of the Christian faith in the community
respects children's rights to uphold their own opinions while providing a broader understanding of this major influence on contemporary Australian culture.
These are of course all statements intended to disguise the fact that this program is a Christian Ministry run by a group who has told us that they want to "make disciples of children".
We won't know how the Judge in this case weighs up the issues - he could do what Gross does, and say, SRI, "meh".
Victorian law says schools are powerless to stop an accredited religious instructor holding classes during the school day.
MULTI-faith primary schools are forced to hold Christian religious classes, even if the school doesn't want them, the Herald Sun can reveal.
Victorian law says schools are powerless to stop an accredited religious instructor holding classes during the school day.
Parents might choose not to have their children attend, but the school council and school principal must offer classes if approached by an approved provider, an Education Department spokeswoman said.
At Ormond Primary a local Anglican priest, the Reverend Kevin Pedersen, has gained access to the school to teach weekly 30-minute classes to the younger students, despite not being invited initially by the principal or the school council.
So far, only 33 out of 180 students from prep, grades 1 and 2 have elected to take the classes at the multicultural school.
A letter to parents from Ormond principal Glenn Butler, seen by the Herald Sun , said the decision to introduce the classes was not initiated by the school, nor was the endorsement of school council sought.
Cathy Wever, mother of a grade 1 pupil, said the classes forced parents to lay out our religious beliefs in public by asking children to opt in or opt out.
"This is a very multi-faith school, and we do not want to divide children on the basis of religion," she said.
Debra Dalidakis said her family was Jewish and chose Ormond Primary because there were no religious instruction classes.
"We do not want our daughter to be separated from her classmates," she said.
Mr Pedersen, from the Ormond Anglican Church, said he approached the school 18 months ago and had a good relationship with the school.
There is a growing backlash against religious instruction in schools, with a case before VCAT challenging the law on the ground of discrimination.
Ormond principal Mr Butler said the program met the legislative requirements.
Just when you thought ACCESS, CEO Evonne Paddison, had the last word, sneering that FIRIS was an "inner urban Melbourne" ... you know, thing, a parent from outer Bendigo, Strathfieldsaye VIC 3551 - took time out from the sheep dip, to send in this photo of a ute sporting a FIRIS sticker parked far from the city lights, and right in front of her kid's school.
Post your FIRIS sticker on your school over on FIRIS FACEBOOK PAGE , inner urban, country VIC, alpine Shire - we don't discriminate.
One of the signal accomplishments of Australian Society was that it diffused the "troubles" which plague places like Belfast.
How did people who migrated here learn to live in peace, while their relatives back home were living amid barbed wire and bombings?
This never happened in Australia - because the schools were never segregated
So it is with some interest that we read the following letter from Belfast that arrived in our inbox from Dr Alison Mawhinney -
I came across your interesting website by chance and thought I'd drop a note to let you know of some research we've been involved with in the UK to do with religious education and opt-outs.
You can find details of the project, its findings and the project report at:
Our research makes reference to international human rights standards (European and UN).
The UN standards are obviously applicable to Australia and it is particularly noteworthy that according to these UN standards, alternatives offered to children who are opted out "must satisfy the wishes of parents".
See page 3 of the attached article for more details.
This is a norm of international law which is frequently ignored by states yet it is one which advocacy organisations such as yourselves should use as a very powerful tool.
If states can not provide suitable alternatives, then they need to rethink their RE curriculum which currently forces parents to opt out their children.
In other words, an inclusive curriculum needs to be designed.
Best wishes, Alison Mawhinney (formely at Queen's University Belfast, now at Bangor University, Wales)
- Dr Alison Mawhinney Lecturer in Law / Darlithydd yn y Gyfraith School of Law / Ysgol y Gyfraith Bangor University / Prifysgol Bangor BANGOR, Gwynedd, LL57 2DG E-mail / E-bost:  a.mawhinney@bangor.ac.uk Tel / Ffon: 01248 388204
- Rhif Elusen Gofrestredig / Registered Charity No. 1141565
Gall y neges e-bost hon, ac unrhyw atodiadau a anfonwyd gyda hi, gynnwys deunydd cyfrinachol ac wedi eu bwriadu i'w defnyddio'n unig gan y sawl y cawsant eu cyfeirio ato (atynt).
Os ydych wedi derbyn y neges e-bost hon trwy gamgymeriad, rhowch wybod i'r anfonwr ar unwaith a dilëwch y neges.
Os na fwriadwyd anfon y neges atoch chi, rhaid i chi beidio â defnyddio, cadw neu ddatgelu unrhyw wybodaeth a gynhwysir ynddi.
Mae unrhyw farn neu safbwynt yn eiddo i'r sawl a'i hanfonodd yn unig  ac nid yw o anghenraid yn cynrychioli barn Prifysgol Bangor.
Nid yw Prifysgol Bangor yn gwarantu bod y neges e-bost hon neu unrhyw atodiadau yn rhydd rhag firysau neu 100% yn ddiogel.
Oni bai fod hyn wedi ei ddatgan yn uniongyrchol yn nhestun yr e-bost, nid bwriad y neges e-bost hon yw ffurfio contract rhwymol - mae rhestr o lofnodwyr awdurdodedig ar gael o Swyddfa Cyllid Prifysgol Bangor.
www.bangor.ac.uk
As indicated on this site last year, I have taken a positive interest in the FIRIS campaign.
I appreciate the aim to provide non-discdriminatory, non-privileged education in the area of religion.
I am willing to provide a public church platform for the voice of FIRIS.
Like a range of other active Christians, I am dismayed that ACCESS no longer seems to represent the breadth of theological viewpoint across the churches.
I also appreciate the FIRE in this site.
: "The current policy is designed to favor ACCESS Ministry, and only ACCESS Ministry."
It is true that by default, ACCESS ministries is in fact privileged in most schools.
However, there is a long standing Jewish organization parallel to ACCESS that under the same legislation gains access to Jewish students in state schools.
A range of other religions also make use of the legislated opportunity to enter schools.
They do not want to lose this access.
As the dominant religion in Australia, I believe we Christians should relinquish the privileged status we have.
But for the sake of the other smaller religions, I am not in favour of totally abolishing the current system.
REPLY TO REVEREND PAUL TONSON
FROM: SCOTT_HEDGES, FIRIS PARENT
ON THE VACUOUSNESS OF CATERING TO FAITH INSTRUCTORS
Your point here is noted - however, I stand by our claim that the policy is designed to favor ACCESS Ministries, and only ACCESS Ministries.
In its most recent incarnation it has been promoted as a form of youth ministry by a self interested group of activists who  many clergy, including some in your own church , have clearly said, should not be in our schools at all.
All of the scholarly inquiry into this points at the value of a rounded, comparative, and objective inquiry into religions.
Have people come of their own volition?
That would never work.
The interests of "Faith Instructors" should not be confused with the basic rights of "citizens", no matter how much the faith instructors say it is their right to "teach their faith" - this wish should never be spun into legislation - or putting the government in the business of endorsing, accrediting or even so much as reviewing for its educational suitability - a course designed to instruct children in the beliefs and tenets of religion.
That is the job of YOUR CHURCH - not a duty for the "student wellbeing office".
Furthermore, religion should not be put to a test of popular preferences and the worst thing possible is to confuse the designs of "faith instructors" with the needs of the schools.
If anything the demands of "faith instructors" should be discounted because they are based on over riding self interest.
Where is your note of concern for this (Jewish) mum, does the fact that she says her children are discriminated mean anything?
Does one have to be a "faith instructor" to speak for the interests of Jewish families, or can you just be "a Jewish family" in order to have standing on the matter?
No family in Australia should have to ask their child to be excused from a program put on in their schools by the local church.