This incorporates the National Literacy and Numeracy Strategies, other core subjects, ICT and Science and foundation subjects which include Design Technology, History, Geography, Art, Physical Education, Music and Religious Education, PSHE (Personal, Social & Health Education) and Citizenship.
The curriculum has extended to include modern foreign languages.
Our first focus is on French and lessons take place in every year group.
Swimming instruction is included within the PE syllabus for years five and six only, for which a small charge is requested to offset the expense of the non-statutory area of instruction.
You will receive a termly outline of the areas of study your child will be working on to encourage discussion, homework support and maybe visits you might want to make to places of interest in connection with the curriculum.
All sports are encouraged as a vital part of our healthy school approach.
Boys and girls take part in football, netball, athletics, rounders, cricket and swimming across the Borough and south-east England.
This sometimes includes inter-school games and galas.
Arrangements for religious worship and instruction - Religious Education is provided at the school in accordance with the Bexley London Borough's Agreed Syllabus for Religious Education.
If requested in writing by the parents, a pupil may be excused from attendance at religious worship and/or instruction.
Each class teacher provides pastoral care.
Sex education is dealt with informally with the younger children.
Sometimes this will happen formally, but more often informally without the children realising, such as marking work or in noting children's oral responses to planned questions.
We will all work together on making sure this is done regularly.
They are also a good tool for communication between the school and home as they can be used for passing messages from the class teacher to parents, both of whom are required to sign the planner each week as having been seen.
Children attending after school clubs must have the prior written permission of their parents to do so and attendance is subject to continued regular participation.
The SEN policy is available at school for parents to see if they wish.
The school day commences at 8.55am and finishes at 3.30pm.