I believe there should be a religious studies programme in State schools teaching about many of the world religions and taught by trained teachers as I do believe it is very important to learn about the religious beliefs and traditions in order to encourage and nurture understanding , tolerance and delight in the diversity.
All the main religions share the basic Golden Rule-do unto others what you would have them do to you or expressed as don't do to another that which you would not like done to you.
I do believe that such a programme could be begun in Grade 1 with learning about the different festivals, progressing to stories from sacred texts and history of the different faiths.
In the schools in which I taught children not doimg CRE were sat in another part of the room or in the computer space between classrooms.
I am sorry that I didn't think to ask could there be another way for them, though the classroom teachers were very caring of them.
I am sorry that I hadn't thought about the segrating effect of the students doing?not doing CRE - it is such an important issue.
One concern was about the story of Jesus turning water into wine,presented as an example of Jesus caring for his friends-by giving them alcohol-this was for grade 1 and 2, with the teacher notes suggesting you could say if you were at a party and the wine ran out people might go home !
not a responsible message when we have such a problem with alcohol in our society.
The only response from Access was that this story was used to show that Jesus is powerful.
There are more examples I could give.
It is quite frightening that this organization is the main provider of Special religious education in Victoria and the only accredited provider of Christian religious education with a theological position that is fundamental.
So even the Christian viewpoint is biased.
I came across your interesting website by chance and thought I'd drop a note to let you know of some research we've been involved with in the UK to do with religious education and opt-outs.
You can find details of the project, its findings and the project report at:
Our research makes reference to international human rights standards (European and UN).
The UN standards are obviously applicable to Australia and it is particularly noteworthy that according to these UN standards, alternatives offered to children who are opted out "must satisfy the wishes of parents".
In other words, an inclusive curriculum needs to be designed.
Best wishes, Alison Mawhinney (formely at Queen's University Belfast, now at Bangor University, Wales)
- Dr Alison Mawhinney Lecturer in Law / Darlithydd yn y Gyfraith School of Law / Ysgol y Gyfraith Bangor University / Prifysgol Bangor BANGOR, Gwynedd, LL57 2DG E-mail / E-bost:  a.mawhinney@bangor.ac.uk Tel / Ffon: 01248 388204
- Rhif Elusen Gofrestredig / Registered Charity No. 1141565
Gall y neges e-bost hon, ac unrhyw atodiadau a anfonwyd gyda hi, gynnwys deunydd cyfrinachol ac wedi eu bwriadu i'w defnyddio'n unig gan y sawl y cawsant eu cyfeirio ato (atynt).
Os na fwriadwyd anfon y neges atoch chi, rhaid i chi beidio â defnyddio, cadw neu ddatgelu unrhyw wybodaeth a gynhwysir ynddi.
Nid yw Prifysgol Bangor yn gwarantu bod y neges e-bost hon neu unrhyw atodiadau yn rhydd rhag firysau neu 100% yn ddiogel.
Oni bai fod hyn wedi ei ddatgan yn uniongyrchol yn nhestun yr e-bost, nid bwriad y neges e-bost hon yw ffurfio contract rhwymol - mae rhestr o lofnodwyr awdurdodedig ar gael o Swyddfa Cyllid Prifysgol Bangor.
One of the signal accomplishments of Australian Society was that it diffused the "troubles" which plague places like Belfast.
This is a norm of international law which is frequently ignored by states yet it is one which advocacy organisations such as yourselves should use as a very powerful tool.
If states can not provide suitable alternatives, then they need to rethink their RE curriculum which currently forces parents to opt out their children.
As indicated on this site last year, I have taken a positive interest in the FIRIS campaign.
I appreciate the aim to provide non-discdriminatory, non-privileged education in the area of religion.
: "The current policy is designed to favor ACCESS Ministry, and only ACCESS Ministry."
However, there is a long standing Jewish organization parallel to ACCESS that under the same legislation gains access to Jewish students in state schools.
A range of other religions also make use of the legislated opportunity to enter schools.
As the dominant religion in Australia, I believe we Christians should relinquish the privileged status we have.
But for the sake of the other smaller religions, I am not in favour of totally abolishing the current system.
REPLY TO REVEREND PAUL TONSON
FROM: SCOTT_HEDGES, FIRIS PARENT
ON THE VACUOUSNESS OF CATERING TO FAITH INSTRUCTORS
Your point here is noted - however, I stand by our claim that the policy is designed to favor ACCESS Ministries, and only ACCESS Ministries.
The history on this point is quite clear - the system itself was not about giving minority faiths "access", it was only because of the manifest injustice that the policy had to be granted to other religions - and the system is totally abusive of families who choose not to follow religion.
The system was a failed attempt at removing the "secular" provision in the education act in order to introduce Christianity for its supposed role in socializing children.
In its most recent incarnation it has been promoted as a form of youth ministry by a self interested group of activists who  many clergy, including some in your own church , have clearly said, should not be in our schools at all.
All of the scholarly inquiry into this points at the value of a rounded, comparative, and objective inquiry into religions.
No Jewish family in Australia is any danger of not having access to "their community" families do not want, or need, religious instructors trespassing on them via the authority of their school principal.
Lastly, the evidence, some of which is linked on our site, shows that good multi faith education is helpful to understanding and tolerance in a pluralist society, and this is overwhelmingly what "parents" and "teachers" want - the only one who wants differently it seems are "faith instructors" and other avowed sectarian interests.
Families are perfectly capable of choosing and engaging in religion - the Minister of Education should not negotiate with "faith instructors" in order to introduce sectarian programs in the schools - this is exactly what is happening here, and raising the concerns of organizations in the business of doing "faith instruction" above the interests of teachers and families is a violation of the basic rights of citizens in a society based on the idea of religious toleration and freedom.
ACCESS is clearly hostile to the core values of Australian society - shame on you ACCESS for thinking you could run over parents like this!!
The parents participating in the VCAT hearing should be commended for their commitment and courage.
On Wednesday 29th Feb, parents were invited to attend a forum at which Ainsley Carr, a representative from ACCESS Ministries, was present to answer our questions about the National School Chaplaincy and Student Welfare Program.
Myself and other parents attending were surprised to learn that the closing date for NSCSWP grant applications was Friday 2nd March at 8pm, giving our school little more than 48 hours to finalise an application and decide on an appropriate provider/recipient who could best meet the needs of our school community.
Given that ACCESS Ministries was the only provider attending the forum, some parents expressed concerns about the possibility that, were we to nominate ACCESS Ministries as the funding recipient, proselytising would occur in our school.
After Ms Carr had left the forum, myself and other parents approached the Principal to express our concerns at the possibility of choosing ACCESS Ministries as a provider for a wellbeing program at our secular school.