Since when should we start judging teachers by their religious beliefs?
I have learned so much from Mullens the past few years.
November 7, 2008, in a conversation between Mr. Mullens and the then-superintendent Lana Comeaux:
[Ms. Comeaux] asked me if I was an atheist and I refused to answer the question.
I didn't know you had to take a religious test to be a teacher in the state of Texas."
January 7, 2009-- a female student leaves Mr. Mullens' classroom to tell the principal that there was an inappropriate discussion in his classroom.
The student's mother also came to school, and had words with the principal.
She accused me of being an atheist, saying I was too liberal, and that I allowed the students to talk about inappropriate things in the classroom.
I told her that occasionally students would get on topics and say things, but I was unable to censor them before they were able to say them.
She said that I called her daughter a name and I denied the accusation.
But then she said that I didn't believe in god and shouldn't be teaching.
She also said that she had spoken to 3 other board members who agreed with her that I shouldn't be teaching because I was too liberal and I was an atheist.
Students would discuss issues like the separation of church and state and the presidential election, he said.
It reeks of prejudice, exactly what we fighting in supporting Mr. Mullens in his efforts to provide insight to students who will undoubtedly experience this same forum in college.
And if anyone at school has a problem with me supporting him, then thats your opinion.
But this case will not rest until justice is served.
You know it is so very funny to me that the schools have been trying off and on for years to take God and religion out of the schools all together.
Now just because one student has issues and runs to Mommy that all of a sudden God is back again.
His religious beliefs should not be on trial here.
That is why the school changed his reason for suspension they new it should not be.
As long as he is not trying to push his beliefs on his students then he should not have to answer for anything other than his teaching.
So many students are behind him which tells me that he is one of the few good teachers in that district.
Mr. Mullens' religious beliefs should have no business being involved.
Brookeland has come so far since I attended there, but now it just looks as if they made their school more "showy" instead of a real school.
And as far as the whole religious thing, it isn't a private catholic school.
I have been a student of Mr. Mullens for five years and not once did i ever hear him say anything about religion.
I have my rights to stand up to a school were they allow "students" to walk around with a tazer that they used on my cousin.
Also, my mother went to school in Brookeland ISD for five years when their was only the master building, the old gym, and a small lunchroom.
The same people that she has known for years are still walking around judging people when they should look in their own backyard.
Preachers should preach at church not school.
Teachers should teach at school the way Mr. Mullens has and according to my mother if your not apart of the brookeland "clique" you don't fit in at all, your an outsider looking in.
But not the people that keep their nose up everybodys ass when it doesn't suit them and their religion.
I'm from Illinois, and have never been to Texas, although I have heard it is a rather religious part of the country.
Anyway, reading this article made me very angry at what sort of things happen in this country.
In a deeply Christian area, he gets persecuted for being atheist?
I hope the authorities involved in this atrocity are reading this.
You are purposefully failing to give your students a good education just to satisfy your own agenda.
One of the principles this country was founded on was separation of church and state.
This teacher's constitutional rights have been violated, and has every right to sue, and he should do so.
Personally, I identify as conservative, but regardless of this man's political views, he is a fellow American and his constitutional rights must be honored.
You cannot deny employment in this country based on religious or political status.
My problem here is that he was distracting from the topic at hand.
What does a pregnant students problems have to do with history?
Now don't get me wrong, persecuting him for being an atheist and/or a liberal is wrong, but it seems that as usual there's more than meets the eye.
My other problem with this is that if this were a christian teacher teaching creationism, there would be an uproar and calls for his resignation, but if a liberal gets in trouble suddenly it's wrong?
Also when you seek to replace a possible athiest teacher with a pastor.... It obvious religion was involved.
Had he been a muslim the school board would have been removed outright and fired.
However, because he was possibly an athiest they didn't think that freedom of thought and religion applied.
As you know they will answer for their doing so before you do.
It's a belief system that worships creation by nature in the place of a and denial of a supernatural deity.
